

<<<PAGE 1>>>
THE JOURNAL OF GENE MEDICINE RESEARCH ARTICLE
J Gene Med 2004; 6: 846–856.
Published online 24 March 2004 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com). DOI: 10.1002/jgm.570
Regeneration of a well-differentiated human airway
surface epithelium by spheroid and lentivirus
vector-transduced airway cells
Nicolas Castillon1†
Aur´elie Avril-Delplanque2,3†
Christelle Coraux1
Christophe Delenda2
Bruno P´eault3
Olivier Danos2
Edith Puchelle1*
1INSERM UMRS 514, IFR 53, CHU
Maison-Blanche, 45 rue Cognacq-Jay,
Reims, France
2GENETHON, CNRS, UMR 8115, 1bis
r u ed el ’ i n t e r n a t i o n a l ,E v r y ,F r a n c e
3INSERM U506, Centre hospitalier
Paul Brousse, 12 avenue Paul Vaillant
Couturier, Villejuif, France
*Correspondence to: Edith Puchelle,
INSERM UMRS 514, IFR 53, CHU
Maison-Blanche, 45 rue
Cognacq-Jay, 51092 Reims
Cedex, France.
E-mail:
edith.puchelle@univ-reims.fr
†These authors contributed equally
to this work.
Received: 22 July 2003
Revised: 19 December 2003
Accepted: 16 January 2004
Abstract
Background Following injury to the airway epithelium, rapid regeneration
of a functional epithelium is necessary in order to restore the epithelial
barrier integrity. In the perspective of airway gene/cell therapy, we analyzed
the capacity of human airway epithelial cells cultured as three-dimensional
(3-D) spheroid structures to be efﬁciently transduced on long term by a
pseudotyped lentiviral vector. The capacity of the 3-D spheroid structures
to repopulate a denuded tracheal ba sement membrane and regenerate a
well-differentiated airway epithelium was also analyzed.
Methods An HIV-1-derived VSV-G pseudotyped lentiviral vector encoding
the enhanced green ﬂuorescent protein (eGFP) was used. Airway epithelial
cells were isolated from mature human fetal tracheas and airway xenografts,
cultured as 3-D spheroid structures, an d either transduced at multiplicity of
infection (MOI) 10 and 100 or assayed in an ex vivo and in vivo model to
evaluate their regeneration capacity.
Results An in vivo repopulation assay in SCID-hu mice with transduced
isolated fetal airway epithelial cells shows that lentiviral transduction does
not alter the airway reconstitution. Transduction of the 3-D spheroid
structures shows that 12% of cells were eGFP-positive for up to 80 days.
In ex vivo and in vivo assays (NUDE-hu mice), the 3-D spheroid structures
are able to repopulate denuded basement membrane and reconstitute a
well-differentiated human airway surface epithelium.
Conclusions The efﬁcient and long-term lentiviral transduction of 3-D
spheroid structures together with their capacity to regenerate a well-
differentiated mucociliary epitheliu m demonstrate the potential relevance
of these 3-D structures in human airway gene/cell therapy. Copyright 2004
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Keywords airway epithelium regeneration; 3-D spheroid structures; lentivirus
vector; cystic ﬁbrosis
Introduction
The airway epithelium represents the ﬁrst barrier of lung defense against
inhaled pathogens or noxious agen ts. Because of its permanent con-
tact with the external environment, the airway epithelium is frequently
injured. As a result of this, severe damage to the epithelial integrity
Copyright  2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

<<<PAGE 2>>>
Regeneration of Airway Epithelium 847
and barrier function can occur: this can vary from a
loss of the barrier permeability to the denudation of
the basement membrane on which the surface airway
epithelium lies. In pathological conditions such as cystic
ﬁbrosis (CF), strategies for the repair and regeneration of
the airway epithelium should also include the repair of
the CF gene mutation. Such an objective requires that the
efﬁcient and long-term expression of a required transgene
in the airway epithelial cells be obtained along with the
capacity of these transduced airway cells to regenerate
a well-differentiated epithelium after reimplantation in
airway-epithelial-denuded areas. The efﬁciency of airway
epithelial gene therapy requires that the gene vector
reaches the airway epithelial cell surface and thereby
overcomes the mucus barrier, after which it binds to
apical receptors to facilitate entry of the virus across the
apical membrane into the cytoplasm. Because the luminal
application of lentiviral vectors failed to transduce well-
differentiated airway epithelium in bronchial xenografts
[1], a strategy to circumvent the mucus barrier and
bypass the apical membrane receptors might be to ﬁrst
transduce isolated non-junctional airway epithelial cells.
T h e s et r a n s d u c e dc e l l sc o u l dt h e nb eu s e dt or e c o n s t i t u t e
an airway epithelium by implantation in upper or
lower airways where denuded basement membrane
may facilitate the adhesion, migration, proliferation and
redifferentiation of these cells, as previously shown
in airway xenograft models [2]. An alternative that
we propose here is to transduce polarized and well-
differentiated 3-D spheroid structures produced from
isolated airway epithelial cells. The spheroid approach
should be superior to the isolated cell approach since
these 3-D spheroid structures can be used as a pool
of autologous corrected human airway epithelial cells
maintained in suspension for several months without
any alteration of their polarized and differentiated state
[3], whereas single epithelial cells in 2-D culture rapidly
dedifferentiate. Under such conditions, the problem of
the mucus barrier can be overcome on account of its
progressive dissolution in the culture medium where the
spheroids are maintained in suspension. The transduced
spheroid structures can then be used to reconstitute a
functional airway surface epithelium. The demonstration
that pseudotyped lentiviral vectors can achieve the
efﬁcient and long-term transduction of a polarized airway
epithelium from the apical cell surface in vivo and in vitro
[4,5] encouraged us to use this vector strategy to
transduce human airway epithelial cells.
In the present study, we evaluate the transduction
efﬁciency and long-term expression of the enhanced
green ﬂuorescent protein (eGFP) contained in a HIV-
1-derived VSV-G pseudotyped lentiviral vector using
in vitro 3-D cell culture. Isolated transduced human
airway epithelial cells cultured as 3-D spheroids showed a
sustained expression of the eGFP for 80 days without
any alteration to airway epithelial differentiation or
functionality. We also observed an efﬁcient transduction
of the eGFP-lentiviral vector into mature and well-
differentiated 3-D spheroid structures. In terms of future
human cell therapy perspectives, we demonstrate, using
a miniaturized in vivo airway xenograft model, that these
epithelial 3-D spheroid structures are able to regenerate
a well-differentiated, polarized and junctional airway
epithelium when implanted on the denuded tracheal
basement membrane of a host trachea.
Materials and methods
Lentiviral vector
The vesicular stomatitis virus glycoprotein (VSV-
G) pseudotyped human lentiviral vector expressing
the enhanced green ﬂuorescent protein (eGFP) used
in this study was produced by co-transfection of
human kidney 293T cells with three plasmids. The
packaging plasmid (pCMV /Delta1R8.74) provides gag, pol,
tat and rev helper vector proteins driven by the
human cytomegalovirus promoter. The envelope plasmid
(pMD.G) encodes the heterologous VSV/G. The trans-
fer vector (pRRLSIN.cPPT.hPGK/eEGFP.WPRE) contains
a 400-bp deletion in the U3 region of the 3
′LTR (self-
inactivating, SIN). The reporter eGFP gene expression
is driven by the internal human phosphoglycerate kinase
promoter and the posttranscriptionalcis-acting regulatory
element of the woodchuck hepatitis virus is inserted in
the sense orientation in order to increase the transgene
expression [6]. The central polypurine tract is associated
with the central termination site in order to enhance
nuclear translocation [7,8].
Lentiviral vector preparations were puriﬁed and
concentrated from the conditioned media of transfected
cells by ultracentrifugation. Lentiviral vector stocks were
titered on HT1080 cells and generally exceeded 5 × 10
9
infectious units (IU)/ml.
FACS analysis
The lentiviral vector was used with a multiplicity of
infection (MOI) ranging from 1 to 100. It was incubated
overnight at 37
◦C with isolated human fetal airway
epithelial cells in the presence of Polybrene (4 µg/mL)
in supplemented RPMI 1640 medium. Cell transduction
was analyzed on a FACScan ﬂow cytometer (Becton
Dickinson). The cells were examined using a single laser
(488 nm wavelength, 0.4 mW power) to generate 2
◦
and 90 ◦ light scatter signals and green ﬂuorescence.
Data were processed as two-parameter dot plots. Five
thousand ungated events per sample were analyzed using
the FACScan research software (BD). Seven experiments
were conducted. Controls were carried out using isolated
cells without incubation with lentiviral vector.
Human fetal airway epithelial cell
culture and transduction
Fetal mature airway epithelial cells were chosen as a
source of human airway epithelial cells in order to avoid
Copyright  2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J Gene Med 2004; 6: 846–856.

<<<PAGE 3>>>
848 N. Castillon et al.
any history of inﬂammation or infection present in the
cell culture that could inﬂuence the transduction and
expression of the lentiviral vector. Human fetal tissues
were collected following therapeutic abortions performed
in compliance with the current French legislation and
with approval of both National (CCNE) and Institutional
(COPE) Ethics Committees. These fetal airway epithelial
cells were isolated either from mature fetal xenografts
as previously described [9] or from ungrafted human
fetal trachea. To harvest xenografts, host mice were
sacriﬁced by cervical dislocation. A total of 68 well-
differentiated human airway xenografts (gestational age:
23.5 ± 5.9 weeks; range 12–32; duration of engraftment:
20.8 ± 13.0 weeks; range 5–46) were harvested and
dissociated to obtain a suspension of isolated human fetal
airway epithelial cells. To that end, xenografts were ﬁlled
intraluminally with 1% pronase in RPMI medium and left
at 4
◦C overnight. The isolated airway surface epithelial
cells were suspended in RPMI medium supplemented
with 10% newborn calf serum (NCS) and then completely
dissociated by ﬂushing the medium through a 0.5 mm
diameter needle to produce a suspension of single cells.
Cell viability, assessed by the trypan blue exclusion test,
was in excess of 90%. The resultant epithelial single-cell
suspension was used to obtain spheroid structures (see
below) as well as for a SCID-hu reconstitution assay.
Human airway epithelial cells were also isolated from
fetal tracheas (n = 5, gestational age: 21 .6 ± 4.3w e e k s )
which were obtained from normal human fetuses after
spontaneous or medically induced abortions. The isolated
tissue was washed in RPMI medium and incubated
o v e r n i g h ta t4
◦C with 1% pronase as described above.
Isolated fetal airway epithelial cells obtained in this
manner were used for 3-D spheroid cultures.
Spheroid structures
Isolated fetal airway epithelial cells (from fetal trachea
or fetal airway xenografts) were suspended in Ham’s F12
medium with 2% Ultroser G and 1% antibiotics (200 U/mL
penicillin and 200 µg/mL streptomycin) and submitted to
permanent horizontal rotation (100 rpm) for 24 h in a 6-
well plate at 37
◦Ca n d5 %C O2. The medium was changed
after 24 h (by gentle centrifugation; 50 g,2 0s )a n dt h e
spheroid structures were transferred to a 25 mL-tissue
culture ﬂask with fresh supplemented Ham’s F12 and
kept in suspension at 37◦Ca n d5 %C O2. The medium was
changed twice a week according to the same protocol [3].
Lentiviral transduction in spheroid structures
Two sets of experiments were carried out. In the ﬁrst set,
the fetal airway epithelial cells were transduced during
spheroid structure formation and the cells were incubated
during permanent horizontal rotation with the lentivirus
(MOI 100) in the presence of Polybrene (4 µg/mL).O n c e
the 3-D structures were formed, the medium was changed,
as described above, in order to remove non-integrated
lentivirus. In the second set of experiments, transduction
was performed on mature (35 days), polarized 3-D
spheroid structures. The lentivirus (MOI 100) and
Polybrene (4 µg/mL) were directly incubated in the
25 mL-tissue culture ﬂask over a 24-h period. eGFP
expression was observed with the aid of a Micromax
CCD camera (Roper Scientiﬁc) on an inverted microscope
(Nikon TE300). The transduced spheroid structures were
directly observed in the 25 mL-tissue culture ﬂask.
Repopulation assays in SCID-hu xenograft
model after lentiviral transduction
Isolated human fetal airway epithelial cells were
incubated overnight at 37
◦C in supplemented RPMI
medium with lentivirus (MOI ranging from 10 to 100)
and Polybrene (4 µg/mL). The medium was then changed
and transduced airway epithelial cells were seeded in the
in vivo SCID-hu assay. Brieﬂy, host human fetal xenografts
were harvested and deprived of their own native
epithelium by three rounds of freezing and thawing in
fetal calf serum (FCS) plus 10% (v/v) dimethyl sulfoxide
(DMSO). For each repopulation experiment (n = 11),
1.10
5 transduced cells were inoculated intraluminally
into distinct conditioned host grafts. Control grafts were
denuded and incubated with RPMI-CaMg. After 24 h
at 37
◦Ca n d5 %C O 2, all grafts were implanted back
into SCID mice. Reconstituted and control grafts were
harvested after several weeks for short- (4 weeks) and
long-(10 weeks) term reconstitution and chemically ﬁxed
with paraformaldehyde (4% in phosphate-buffered saline,
PBS) for 1 h at 4
◦C. The grafts were then rinsed with
PBS and embedded in optimum cutting temperature
c o m p o u n d( O C T ,T i s s u eT e k ,C A ,U S A ) ,c r y o ﬁ x e di n
liquid nitrogen and stored at −80◦C. Frozen sections
(5 µm thick) were placed on gelatin-coated glass slides,
rehydrated with PBS (10 min, room temperature) and
mounted with Aquamount Mountant (BDH, UK) for
eGFP detection. The percentage of transduced cells was
analyzed by counting the number of eGFP-positive cells in
the reconstituted surface epithelium in 10 sections from
each graft.
Airway repopulation assays with 3-D
spheroid structures
In vitro
Approximately 100 mature human fetal airway spheroid
structures (35 days) were placed in contact with a
collagen gel mimicking the environment of a denuded
basement membrane. Alterations in cell membrane
permeability of the spheroids after their adhesion was
analyzed using a cell viability kit (Interchim, France)
containing a mixture of SYTO 9 green-ﬂuorescent nucleic
acid stain (3.34 mM in DMSO) and propidium iodide red-
ﬂuorescent nucleic acid stain (20 mM in DMSO). SYTO 9
labels all the cells, whereas propidium iodide penetrates
only those cells with damaged membranes causing a
reduction in the SYTO 9 ﬂuorescence when both dyes are
present. Thus, using a mixture of the two probes, it was
Copyright  2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J Gene Med 2004; 6: 846–856.

<<<PAGE 4>>>
Regeneration of Airway Epithelium 849
possible to ascertain whether cell membranes were intact
(green straining) or altered (red staining). The contents of
the 25 mL-tissue culture ﬂask, containing approximately
100 mature (35 days) spheroid structures, were gently
centrifuged (50 g, 20 s) and the pellet incubated in 1 mL
Ham’s F12 medium containing a mixture of SYTO 9 and
propidium iodide (15 min, 37
◦C). The spheroids were
then rinsed in Ham’s F12 medium and the pellet was
suspended in 20 µL of the same medium and seeded
on a collagen gel in a 96-well dish. The spheroids were
maintained in contact with the gel at 37
◦Cf o r3h .A f t e r
adhesion, 20 µL of Ham’s F12 medium were added and
changed every day. The Syto9/propidium iodide-stained
spheroids were observed in the 96-well dish.
Ex vivo
Human fetal tracheas (gestational age: 22 ± 1.5w e e k s ;
ranging from 20–24 weeks) were treated with one round
of freezing and thawing in order to remove the native
airway surface epithelium without basement membrane
degradation. They were then placed on a collagen gel in a
96-well dish and used as a host matrix. Approximately 100
mature spheroids (35 days) were seeded on the matrix
according to the same protocol as described above. At day
1, 2, 7 or 15, the matrix was embedded in OCT, cryoﬁxed
in liquid nitrogen, and stored at −80
◦C. Frozen sections
(5 µm thick) were placed on gelatin-coated glass slides
for immunocytochemical analysis.
In vivo
We have developed a miniaturized humanized tracheal
xenograft model using denuded mouse trachea implanted
in NUDE mice. The dimensions of the mouse trachea
w e r e5 m mi nl e n g t hw i t ha ni n n e rd i a m e t e ro fa b o u t
1 mm. Immediately after their removal from the mouse,
the tracheas were tied at their distal end to sterile
polyethylene tubing using tissue glue (Histoacryl, Braun,
Germany) and frozen at −80
◦C in order to remove the
surface airway epithelium. An average of 100 mature
spheroids (35 days) in supplemented Ham’s F12 medium
were seeded into the denuded mouse trachea through a
needle (0.8 mm diameter) and the grafts were placed in
a sterile environment at 37
◦C for 3 h in order to promote
spheroid adherence. The tracheas were then implanted
in the ﬂanks of NUDE mice (Charles River France,
France) previously anestheti zed with an intraperitoneal
(i.p.) injection of pentobarbital sodium (40 mg/kg) and
maintained under pathogen-free conditions. The mice
were killed by an overdose of i.p.-injected pentobarbital
sodium on day 7, 14, 21, 28 or 35 after implantation.
Tracheas were directly cryoﬁxed as described above.
Frozen sections (5 µm) were kept at −20
◦Cf o rf u r t h e r
immunocytochemical analysis.
Immunoﬂuorescence microscopy
A mouse monoclonal antibody (mAb) raised against
cytokeratin peptide 18 (CK18, CY-90 clone, at a dilution
of 1: 400, purchased from Sigma) was used for labeling
of columnar ciliated and secretory cells. An mAb raised
against the cytokeratin peptide 13 (CK13, at a dilution of
1: 400, purchased from Sigma) was used for the labeling
of basal cells. For cell proliferation analysis, a monoclonal
antibody raised against the Ki67 antigen (MIB-1 clone)
was purchased from Immunotech (France), and used at
a dilution of 1 : 20. For secretory cell identiﬁcation, the
polyclonal antibody MUC5AC (raised in rabbit; kindly
provided by J.-P. Aubert, INSERM U377, Lille, France)
was used at a dilution of 1 : 800. For labeling of the
junctional protein ZO-1, an mAb (purchased from Zymed,
San Francisco, CA, USA) was used at a dilution of 1 : 20.
CFTR mAb was purchased from R&D Systems (Oxford,
UK) and used at a dilution of 1 : 20. Ezrin polyclonal
antibody (raised in goat) was purchased from Santa
Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA, USA) and used at a
dilution of 1 : 50. Biotinylated secondary antibodies raised
against whole immunoglobulins (IgG) of mouse, goat or
rabbit were purchased from Amersham Pharmacia Biotech
(UK) and used at a 1 : 50 dilution. Immunocytochemical
analyses were performed on frozen sections which were
ﬁxed in pre-cooled methanol ( −20
◦C) for 15 min. To
saturate non-speciﬁc sites, the sections were incubated
with 1% bovine serum albumin (BSA) in 0.1 M PBS. The
sections were then sequentially treated as follows: they
were exposed to the primary antibody (diluted in 0.1 M
PBS/BSA 1%) for 1 h at room temperature, washed in
0.1 M PBS, incubated with 1% 0.1 M PBS/BSA, exposed
to the adequate biotinylated antibody (1 : 50 in 1% 0.1 M
PBS/BSA), washed in 0.1 M PBS and ﬁnally revealed with
streptavidin alexa ﬂuor 488 at a 1 : 100 dilution in 0.1 M
PBS for 30 min. Sections were ﬁnally counterstained
with Harris hematoxylin solution (Sigma) and mounted
in Aqua Polymount antifading solution (Polysciences,
Warrington, PA, USA). Observations were made with the
aid of an Axiophot microscope with epiﬂuorescence and
Nomarski differential interference illumination.
Functional activity of the 3-D human
fetal airway epithelium spheroid
structures
In order to control the functional activity of the spheroid
structures before and after lentiviral transduction, a
quantitative analysis of the beating frequency of the
ciliated cells was performed and their chloride efﬂux
capacity analyzed.
Video measurement of the ciliary beating
frequency
In order to assess the functional activity of the ciliated
cells after lentiviral transduction, video recordings of
ciliated cells present on the surface of the transduced
spheroids were performed with a ×40 objective in the
light path. For measurements of ciliary beating, the video
images of active ciliated cells were displayed on a video
Copyright  2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J Gene Med 2004; 6: 846–856.

<<<PAGE 5>>>
850 N. Castillon et al.
screen where individual ciliated cells could be selected for
analysis using a previously described technique [10].
Measurement of chloride efﬂux by SPQ analysis
Tissue culture ﬂasks (n = 4) containing mature trans-
duced spheroids were incubated with the 6-methoxy-
N-(3-sulfopropyl)quinolinium (SPQ) probe (Sigma, MO,
USA) in a hypotonic chloride buffer solution (130 mM
NaCl, 2.4m MK 2HPO4,1 0m M D-glucose, 1 mM CaSO4,
1m MM g S O4 and 10 mM Hepes). Each spheroid was
maintained in position by a contention microcapillary
tube (Vacutips ,E p p e n d o r fS c i e n t i ﬁ c ,N Y ,U S A )i nap e r -
fused culture on an inverted microscope (Nikon TE300).
Spheroids were ﬁrst incubated for 15 min in a nitrate
buffer in which the NaCl was replaced by 130 mM NaNO3.
Every 15 min, amiloride (10 µM), forskolin (25 µM) and
ATP (10 µM) were successively added to the nitrate
buffer. Throughout the experimental process, ﬂuores-
cence images (obtained from excitation light at 365 nm
and emission light at 395 nm) were recorded every minute
using a Micromax CDD camera and Metamorph soft-
ware (Universal Imaging, USA). Chloride secretion by the
spheroids was estimated by measuring variations with
time in SPQ ﬂuorescence in regions of interest on each
image of the series as described by Bonnet and Zahm [11].
Statistical analysis
Results are expressed as mean ± standard error (SE).
For the SPQ analysis, the variations in ﬂuorescence
were measured over a 2-min period ( /Delta1F//Delta1t). Data are
compared using Student’s t-test with a value of p < 0.005
considered to be signiﬁcant.
Results
Gene transfer efﬁciency
As a ﬁrst step, we investigated the optimal conditions
required to achieve an efﬁcient and non-toxic transduction
of isolated human fetal airway epithelial cells with a
lentiviral vector. To that end, dissociated cells were
transduced in suspension with the eGFP-lentiviral vector
using a multiplicity of infection (MOI) ranging from 1 to
100 with eGFP expression evaluated by ﬂow cytometric
analysis.
As shown in Figure 1, about 6% of cells were transduced
at a MOI of 10. The percentage of eGFP-positive cells was
stabilized at 15% for MOI 25 to 75. According to the
experimental conditions that provided an efﬁcient level of
transduction, we selected two optimal MOIs (10 and 100)
to study the transduction of the lentiviral-eGFP vector in
polarized and well-differentiated 3-D airway cell cultures.
After transduction with lentivirus (MOIs of 10 and 100),
the dissociated infected human fetal airway epithelial cells
were seeded in the SCID-hu reconstitution assay in order
to analyze their fate in vivo (Figure 2). After 4 weeks of
engraftment, transduced epithelial cells restored a well-
differentiated human airway epithelium characterized by
surface epithelial cells (Figure 2A) and submucosal glands
(Figure 2B). In all these structures, eGFP expression was
observed in clusters of cells, and could still be identiﬁed
after 10 weeks of engraftment (data not shown). The
percentage of transduced airway epithelial cells with the
MOI of 100 was 33.0 ± 14.9% as measured after 4 weeks
of engraftment. Interestingly, no signiﬁcant difference was
observed in the number of eGFP-positive cells transduced
at MOIs of 10 and 100.
Transduction efﬁciency in polarized
and well-differentiated 3-D spheroid
structures
After eGFP-lentiviral transduction (MOI 100), the dis-
sociated human fetal airway epithelial cells cultured in
suspension (under permanent rotation) rapidly reassem-
bled (after 24 h) as 3-D spheroid structures exhibiting
eGFP expression (Figures 3A and 3B) which was main-
tained throughout the duration of the study (80 days).
Dissociation of 3-D spheroid structures and ﬂuorescence-
activated cell sorting (FACS) analysis showed a percent-
age of 12 .0 ± 1.7% of airway epithelial cells that were
positive for eGFP. After 3 weeks, mature cilia at the sur-
face of the spheroids were evident. The ciliary beating
0
10
20
30
40
50
0 2 04 06 08 0 1 0 0
MOI
eGFP-positive epithelial
cells (%)
Figure 1. FACS analysis of transduced airway epithelial cells. Rel ationship between the lentiviral multiplicity of infection (MOI
from 1–100) and the percentage of eGFP-posit ive cells. Results are expressed as means ± SE
Copyright  2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J Gene Med 2004; 6: 846–856.

<<<PAGE 6>>>
Regeneration of Airway Epithelium 851
Figure 2. eGFP expression in SCID-hu in vivo reconstitution assay. After enzymatic dissociation, human airway epithelial cells were
transduced by a lentiviral vector (MOI 100) encoding eGFP. After 4 weeks of engraftment , transduced epithelial cells exhibit a
well-differentiated human airway surface epithelium (A) and submucosal glands (B) which express eGFP. Bar: A, 15 µm; B, 10 µm
Figure 3. Three-dimensional (3- D) spheroid structures transduction. (A) Phase contrast microscopy of a spheroid. (B) Using
ﬂuorescence microscopy, the sustained expression of eGFP is maintained for up to 80 days in the spheroid structures obtained
from isolated cells. eGFP expression in mature and well-differentiated spheroids immediately after transduction (C) is maintained
for 80 days (D). Bar: 40 µm
Copyright  2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J Gene Med 2004; 6: 846–856.

<<<PAGE 7>>>
852 N. Castillon et al.
Copyright  2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J Gene Med 2004; 6: 846–856.

<<<PAGE 8>>>
Regeneration of Airway Epithelium 853
frequency (CBF) of the ciliated cells, as analyzed by
videomicroscopy, was 9.5 ± 3.0 Hz, a value similar to that
measured in well-differentiated human airway epithelial
tissue (data not shown). To evaluate the chloride channel
activity of these cells, the value of /Delta1F//Delta1t was ana-
lyzed for 2 min after sequential stimulation by forskolin
and ATP. We could not observe any signiﬁcant differ-
ence (p > 0.1) between transduced (forskolin: /Delta1F//Delta1t =
0.0923 ± 0.0046; ATP: /Delta1F//Delta1t = 0.1154 ± 0.0059) and
non-transduced spheroids (forskolin: /Delta1F//Delta1t = 0.1049 ±
0.0152; ATP: /Delta1F//Delta1t = 0.1290 ± 0.0248). These results
conﬁrm that a normal airway maturation with expression
of a functional chloride channel activity is maintained
after lentiviral tranduction.
After lentiviral transduction of well-differentiated
spheroids (35 days), expression of eGFP was observed
(Figure 3C) which could be maintained for 80 days
(Figure 3D) without any alteration to the CBF or chloride
channel activity (data not shown). After dissociation of
these transduced mature spheroids and FACS analysis, it
was found that the percentage of eGFP-positive cells was
similar (15.0 ± 3.0%) to that observed after dissociation
of 3-D spheroid structures from transduced isolated fetal
airway epithelial cells and was unchanged after 80 days
of culture.
Airway epithelial regeneration with 3-D
spheroid structures
In order to analyze the viability of the airway epithelial
cells from transduced spheroids and the capacity of
these 3-D structures to adhere to a denuded basement
membrane and regenerate a well-differentiated airway
epithelium, in vitro, ex vivo and in vivo repopulation
assays were performed.
In vitro assay
After seeding the spheroids on a collagen gel, all of the
cells of the 3-D spheroid structures were observed to be
stained green with the Syto9 probe thereby demonstrating
that these epithelial cells remained alive even after
losing their 3-D organization (data not shown). After
3 days of culture on the collagen gel, no remaining 3-
D structures were identiﬁed and only small groups of
cells or isolated cells were observed with green Syto9
staining. After 8 days, only isolated cells were observed
distributed across the collagen gel surface. All adhered
cells exhibited Syto9 green staining showing that, after
adherence and loss of their 3-D spheroid structure, the
integrity of epithelial cell membranes was still intact (data
not shown).
Ex vivo assay
Using denuded fetal trachea as the host matrix, we ﬁrst
controlled that native human fetal airway epithelial cells
were no longer present on the basement membrane
after freezing and thawing denudation (CK18-negative
immunostaining, data not shown). Twenty-four hours
after seeding the spheroids on the denuded fetal trachea,
the onset of adherence of epithelial cells from spheroid
structures to the denuded basement membrane was
apparent (Figure 4A). After 48 h, all epithelial cells
from spheroid structures had adhered to the basement
membrane (data not shown). After 1 week of culture,
only one layer of epithelial cells could be observed
along the length of the basement membrane (Figure 4B).
Approximately 50% of the area of the denuded basement
membrane was covered by the airway epithelial cells.
Under these ex vivo experimental conditions, no further
proliferation (MIB-1-negative cells, data not shown) or
epithelial differentiation could be observed after 3 weeks
of culture.
In vivo assay
Using denuded mouse trachea as a host matrix for the
spheroids, an airway epithelial cell monolayer (CK18-
positive, Figures 4C and 4D) covered approximately 90%
of the basement membrane after 1 week of in vivo
development in nude mice. After 2 weeks of engraftment,
the epithelial cell monolayer adhering to the basement
membrane remained unchanged (data not shown).
After 4 weeks of engraftment, a pseudostratiﬁed and
well-differentiated mature human airway epithelium,
similar to that described in mature human fetal airway
tissue [12], characterized by CK18-positive ciliated and
secretory cells (Figures 4E and 4F) and CK13-positive
basal cells (Figures 4G and 4H), could be observed. At
that stage we veriﬁed, using immunocytochemistry, that
the human airway epithelium reconstituted from the
3-D spheroid structures was polarized and junctional.
MUC5AC mucin was identiﬁed in the secretory cells as
well as in the secreted mucus inside the lumen of the host
trachea (Figures 5A and 5E). As a polarity and junctional
marker, the ZO-1 junctional protein was identiﬁed at
the most apico-basolateral sides of the reconstituted
airway epithelium (Figures 5B and 5F). CFTR protein
was observed at the apical domain (Figures 5C and 5G)
while the CFTR-associated protein, ezrin, was also apically
located (Figures 5D and 5H).
Figure 4. Repopulation assay with mature 3-D spheroids. (A) For the ex vivo model, after 24 h of contact between spheroids
and epithelium-denuded fetal trachea, 3-D structures adhered to the basement membrane are observed (arrow). (B) Using CK18
immunostaining, a monolayer of airway epithelial cells at day 7 can be observed adhering to and covering the basement membrane.
(C) In an in vivo model of a humanized airway xenograft, a monolayer of CK18-positive airway epithelial cells (arrows) is observed
after 1 week of engraftment. After 4 weeks of engraftment, a well-differentiated human airway epithelium is observed, as shown
by CK 18-positive immunostaining of supra-basal cells (E) and CK 13-positive immunostaining of basal cells (G). The basal lamina
is indicated by arrows. D, F and H: corresponding Nomarski. Bar: A, 20 µm; B, C, D, E and F, 10 µm
Copyright  2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J Gene Med 2004; 6: 846–856.

<<<PAGE 9>>>
854 N. Castillon et al.
Figure 5. Characterization of the reconstituted human airway epithelium. (A) Using immunolocalization, the mucin MUC5AC is
expressed by secretory cells (SC) and secreted in the lumen (Lu) 28 days after engraftment. (B) The junctional protein ZO-1 is
observed (arrow) at the apico-basolateral side of the surface epithelium (C). The CFTR is apically located as shown by arrows such
as ezrin, a CFTR-associated protein (D). E, F, G and H: corresponding Nomarski. Bar: 10 µm
Copyright  2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J Gene Med 2004; 6: 846–856.

<<<PAGE 10>>>
Regeneration of Airway Epithelium 855
Discussion
The recent development of lentivirus-based vectors
derived from HIV for gene transfer into airway epithelium
represents a major advance in gene therapy of lung
diseases such as cystic ﬁbrosis [1,13–16]. Lentivirus-
based vectors have been shown to transduce several types
of non-dividing cells including airway epithelial cells
[4,5]. Nevertheless, Johnson et al. [15] have reported
that, in mice, human lentiviral vector pseudotyped with
the vesicular stomatitis virus G (VSVG) envelope requires
airway epithelium injury in order to permit basolateral
access of the vector to target cells. Goldman et al.[ 1 ]
reported that this lentiviral vector was able to transduce
a poorly differentiated airway epithelium xenograft with
high efﬁciency, but gene transfer was far less efﬁcient
when the epithelium was fully differentiated. In a
number of experiments, the lentiviral vector transduction
has been tested on two-dimensional airway epithelial
cell cultures [4,15]. As reported by Pilewski [17], it
is particularly important to choose appropriate in vitro
and in vivo human models for the evaluation of gene
transfer in order for them to be used as predictors of
efﬁciency in polarized human airway epithelium. In the
present study, we investigated the capacity of an HIV-
derived lentiviral vector encoding eGFP to transduce
human airway epithelial cells. We ﬁrst controlled
that reconstituted acellular xenografted tracheas could
recapitulate all the eGFP-positive epithelial phenotypes
of a pseudostratiﬁed human surface epithelium. The
observation of clusters of eGFP-positive cells in basal,
ciliated and secretory cells, which were still present
after 10 weeks of engraftment, suggests that therapeutic
lentiviral vectors could be used to correct the cystic ﬁbrosis
transmembrane conductance (CFTR) abnormality in CF
airway epithelial cells. With this in mind, we analyzed
the capacity of airway epithelial cells, cultured as 3-
D spheroid structures, to be transduced with long-term
persistence. We recently reported that this culture model
of airway epithelial cells in suspension could maintain
a polarized, junctional and differentiated mucociliary
surface epithelium for several months [3]. This long-term
3-D airway epithelial cell culture has distinct advantages
as compared with the classical 2-D culture because it
permits the polarization and maintenance of functional
apical membrane-associated proteins such as CFTR, ezrin,
ZO-1 and CD59. Using this 3-D model, 15 .0 ± 3.0%
of eGFP-transduced cells were maintained for more
than 80 days. This outcome was achieved without any
alteration to the functional properties of the mature
airway epithelium as demonstrated by the maintenance
of an active ciliary beating of ciliated cells and a normal
capacity to secrete chloride after amiloride and forskolin
or ATP stimulation. This percentage represents an efﬁcient
transduction as it has been reported previously that a
normal epithelial function in CF can be resolved with a
transduction of less than 10% [15].
In order to circumvent the mucus barrier, which
in vivo prevents gene transfer, an alternative could be
to isolate autologous human airway epithelial cells and
constitute a pool of well-differentiated surface epithelium
cultured as 3-D spheroids which could be maintained in
suspension for several months and then be used, after
lentiviral transduction, for reimplantation on a denuded
basement membrane. The subsequent objective of this
study was to analyze in an ex vivo model whether these
spheroid epithelial structures, implanted on a denuded
basement membrane of trachea serving as a matrix,
could attach, migrate and repopulate the matrix. Under
these ex vivo conditions, the surface airway epithelial
cells from the 3-D spheroid structures were observed
to attach and migrate on the denuded matrix although
we only observed a monolayer of epithelial cells which
did not exhibit mucociliary differentiation after 3 weeks.
In order to more closely mimic the in vivo conditions
required for a complete airway epithelial redifferentiation,
we developed an in vivo miniaturized human airway
xenograft using denuded mice trachea rather than a rat
trachea as a host matrix. After 4 weeks of engraftment,
a complete regeneration of a polarized and functional
mucociliary epithelium was observed. In conclusion, the
3-D spheroid cell culture appears as a valuable model
for evaluating gene vector transduction efﬁciency. The
application of this 3-D gene and cell therapy may be
relevant for constitution of pools of spheroids from human
CF airway brushings that could represent a source of
autologous corrected airway epithelial cells to be used
to repopulate the injured airway epithelium. In this
perspective, we are presently analyzing the capacity of
ampliﬁed isolated (CF and non-CF) fetal and adult human
airway epithelial cells to reform spheroid structures and be
efﬁciently transduced with a cDNA-CFTR lentivirus. Such
gene/cell therapy might prove to be highly valuable in
obtaining airway epithelial regeneration for the treatment
of airway diseases such as cystic ﬁbrosis.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Prof. Dominique Gaillard (INSERM UMRS
514, Reims, France) for providing human fetal tissues.
We acknowledge the expert assistance of Ibrahim Casal
(INSERM U506, Villejuif, France) with ﬂow cytometry. We
thank Jocelyne Hinnrasky and Jean-Marie Zahm (INSERM
UMRS 514, Reims, France) for their technical assistance
and Corinne Catusse and Veronique Laplace (INSERM UMRS
514, Reims, France) for their help with the NUDE xenograft
model. This work was supported by a contract (TG0217)
from the Association Vaincre la Mucoviscidose and by
ATC Bioth ´erapies/Cellules Souches Th ´erapeutiques (Minist `ere
de la Recherche/INSERM/Association Fran¸ c a i s ec o n t r el e s
Myopathies (AFM)/Association Vaincre la Mucoviscidose).
References
1. Goldman MJ, Lee PS, Yang JS, Wilson JM. Lentiviral vectors
for gene therapy of cystic ﬁbrosis. Hum Gene Ther 1997; 8:
2261–2268.
Copyright  2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J Gene Med 2004; 6: 846–856.

<<<PAGE 11>>>
856 N. Castillon et al.
2. Delplanque A, Coraux C, Tirouvanziam R, et al. Epithelial stem
cell-mediated development to the human respiratory mucosa in
SCID mice. J Cell Sci 2000; 113: 767–778.
3. Castillon N, Hinnrasky J, Zahm JM, et al. Polarized expression of
CFTR and associated epithelial proteins during the regeneration
of human airway surface epithelium in three-dimensional
culture. Lab Invest 2002; 82: 989–998.
4. Kobinger GP, Weiner DJ, Yu QC, Wilson JM. Filovirus-
pseudotyped lentiviral vec tor can efﬁciently and stably
transduce airway epithelia in vivo. Nat Biotechnol 2000; 19:
225–230.
5. Borok Z, Harboe-Schmidt JE, Brody SL, et al.V e s i c u l a r
stomatitis virus G-pseudotyp ed lentivirus vectors mediate
efﬁcient apical transduction of polarized quiescent primary
alveolar epithelial cells. JV i r o l2001; 75: 11 747–11 754.
6. Follenzi A, Ailles LE, Bakovic S, Geuna M, Naldini L. Gene
transfer by lentiviral vectors is limited by nuclear translocation
and rescued by HIV-1 pol sequences. Nat Genet 2000; 25:
217–222.
7. Zufferey R, Donello JE, Trono D, Hope TJ. Woodchuck
hepatitis virus posttranscriptional regulatory element enhances
expression of transgenes delivered by retroviral vectors. JV i r o l
1999; 73: 2886–2892.
8. Zennou V, Serguera C, Sarkis C, et al.T h eH I V - 1D N Aﬂ a p
stimulates HIV vector mediated cell transduction in the brain.
Nat Biotechnol 1999; 19: 446–450.
9. Peault B, Tirouvanziam R, Sombardier MN, Chen S, Perri-
caudet M, Gaillard D. Gene tran sfer to human fetal pulmonary
tissue developed in immunodeﬁcient SCID mice.Hum Gene Ther
1994; 5: 1131–1137.
10. Zahm JM, Dionisius JP, Pierrot D, Chevillard M, Puchelle E.
Video measurement of the cil iary beating frequency. Innov Biol
Med 1990; 11: 118–128.
11. Bonnet N, Zahm JM. Analysis of image sequence in ﬂuorescence
videomicroscopy of stationary objects. Cytometry 1998; 31:
217–228.
12. Gaillard D, Lallement A, Petit A, Puchelle E. In vivo ciliogenesis
in human fetal tracheal epithelium. Am J Anat 1989; 185:
415–428.
13. Wang G, Davidson BL, Melchert P, et al. Inﬂuence of cell polarity
on retrovirus-mediated gene transfer to differentiated human
airway epithelia. JV i r o l1998; 72: 9818–9826.
14. Limberis M, Anson DS, Fulle r M ,P a r s o n s D W .R e c o v e r yo f
airway cystic ﬁbrosis transmembrane conductance regulator
function in mice with cystic ﬁbrosis after single-dose lentivirus-
mediated gene transfer. Hum Gene Ther 2002; 13: 1961–1970.
15. Johnson LG, Olsen JC, Sarkadi B, Moore KL, Swanstrom R,
Boucher RC. Efﬁciency of gene transfer for restoration of normal
airway epithelial function in cystic ﬁbrosis. Nat Genet 1992; 2:
21–25.
16. Naldini L. Lentiviruses as gene transfer agents for delivery to
non-dividing cells. Curr Opin Biotechnol 1998; 9: 457–463.
17. Pilewski JM, Engelhardt JF, Bavaria JE, Kaiser LR, Wilson JM,
Albelda SM. Adenovirus-mediated gene transfer to human
bronchial submucosal glands using xenografts. Am J Physiol
1995; 268: L657–665.
Copyright  2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. J Gene Med 2004; 6: 846–856.