

<<<PAGE 1>>>
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-44488-1
Human apical-out nasal organoids reveal an
essential role of matrix metalloproteinases in
airway epithelial differentiation
Liyue Li1,2,8, Linyi Jiao1,8, Danni Feng1,8, Yizhang Yuan1,8, Xiaoqian Yang3,J i a nL i1,4,
Dong Jiang3, Hexin Chen1, Qingxiang Meng5, Ruchong Chen6,B i x i n gF a n g1,
Xuenong Zou3, Zhenhua Luo 3,X i a o y a nY e1,4, Yue Hong 7,C h u nL i u 3 &
Chunwei Li 1
Extracellular matrix (ECM) assembly/disassembly is a critical regulator for
airway epithelial development and remodeling. Airway organoid is widely used
in respiratory research, yet there is limited study to indicate the roles and
mechanisms of ECM organization in epithelial growth and differentiation by
using in vitro organoid system. Moreover, most of current Matrigel-based
airway organoids are in basal-out orientation where accessing the apical sur-
face is challenging. We present a human apical-out airway organoid using a
biochemically deﬁned hybrid hydrogel system. During human nasal epithelial
progenitor cells (hNEPCs) differentiation, the gel gradually degrade, leading to
the organoid apical surfaces facing outward. The expression and activity of
ECM-degrading enzymes, matrix metalloproteinases (MMP7, MMP9, MMP10
and MMP13) increases during organoid differentiation, where inhibition of
MMPs signiﬁcantly suppresses the normal ciliation, resulting in increased
goblet cell proportion. Mo r e o v e r ,ad e c r e a s eo fM M P si sf o u n di ng o b l e tc e l l
hyperplastic epithelium in inﬂammatory mucosa. This system reveals essential
roles of epithelial-derived MMPs on epit h e l i a lc e l lf a t ed e t e r m i n a t i o n ,a n d
provides an applicable platform enabling further study for ECM in regulating
airway development in health and diseases.
The airway epithelium is critical for maintaining the homeostasis of
respiratory mucosa. Dysregulation of epithelia leads to abnormal
remodeling that can initiate in ﬂammation in airway mucosa
1– 3.T h e
respiratory epithelium, ranging from sinonasal cavity to large
bronchioles, is called mucociliary epithelium that mainly contains
basal, secretory (mainly goblet cells), ciliated cells and extracellular
matrix (ECM). Among them, basal cells are functioning as progenitors
of the multiciliated and secretory cell populations
4,5.T h ed e v e l o p m e n t
of airway epithelium involves a series of complex alterations in the
cellular microenvironment, where the interaction between progenitor
Received: 14 March 2023
Accepted: 14 December 2023
Check for updates
1Department of Otolaryngology, Department of Allergy, Guangzhou Key Laboratory of Otorhinolaryngology, The First Afﬁliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, China.2Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Tech-
nology, Wuhan, China.3Precision Medicine Institute, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Orthopedics and Traumatology, The First Afﬁliated Hospital of
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.4Guangxi Hospital Division of The First Afﬁliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Nanning, China.5Department of
Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Guangzhou First People’s Hospital, Guangzhou, China.6State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, National
Clinical Research Center for Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Health, Department of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Guangzhou
Medical University, Guangzhou, China.7School of Life Sciences, Hainan University, Haikou, China.8These authors contributed equally: Liyue Li, Linyi Jiao,
Danni Feng, Yizhang Yuan. e-mail: liuch393@mail.sysu.edu.cn; hi_chunwei@aliyun.com
Nature Communications|          (2024) 15:143 1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;

<<<PAGE 2>>>
cells and ECM has been demonstrated to play a key role in epithelium
formation, as well as disease occurrence 6. Indeed, ECM (especially
collagens) is essential for controlling cell behavior during tissue for-
mation in many organ systems
7– 10; and change of ECM assembly and
disassembly properties is a critical feature for airway epithelial devel-
opment, while imbalance of ECM organization can lead to abnormal
epithelial remodeling
6,11,12. However, the mechanisms of how epithelial
progenitor cells interact with ECM during airway development remain
unclear, which is partially due to the lack of a biomimetic model that
can recapitulate the development of progenitor cells within ECM
in vitro.
Airway organoids have recently emerged as a promising experi-
mental tool to model the human respiratory tract and the organoids
have been successfully used to address outstanding questions in
respiratory biology
13– 16. Generally, lung or airway organoids refer to
self-assembling structures of epithelial cells cultured in 3D. And the
cellular origins of organoids include basal progenitor cells from adult
tissues, embryonic stem cells, and induced pluripotent stem cells
17.
Most of current organoid models are generated using‘ Matrigel’ ,w h i c h
is a commercialized hydrogel extracted from a murine tumor18.H o w -
ever, very few studies have explored the interactions between cells and
ECM using Matrigel
18. This is mainly due to the relative stable hydrogel
properties caused by inherent laminin and type IV collagen that limit
the capability of cells to remodel ECM. The degradation of Matrigel
during cell culture is a slow process which can last as long as a few
months, and the lack of type I collagen largely restricted the migration
of cells. Therefore, instead of growing outward by degrading the sur-
rounding gel and migration, cells in Matrigel tend to grow more
inwards to form spheroids, leading to a basal-out orientation as
reported in most of current airway organoid models
14,19, i.e., the apical
surface (ciliated cells or goblet cells) of the epithelium is enclosed
within the spheroid. Such orientation pattern may not fully recapitu-
late the in vivo epithelial structure character, as the apical surface of
airway epithelium should face to atmosphere and readily interact with
luminal contents. Moreover, the current basal-out models lead to dif-
ﬁculties in studying the epithelial host-stimulant interactions, as the
apical layer is hard to access by pathogens. Although besides the
Matrigel based models, there has also been commercialized culture
system that can enable airway spheroids in an apical-out manner, the
lack of 3D hydrogel environment made it inappropriate to study the
cell-ECM interaction
20,21. Therefore, there is a need to develop a simple,
chemically deﬁned, highly tunable, and tissue-speciﬁch y d r o g e la l t e r -
natives, in order to study the role of ECM during airway epithelial
development and remodeling in a more physiologically-relevant
manner.
We previously have shown the collagen/alginate hydrogel as a
biomimetic ECM material for cancer cell proliferation and
migration
22,23, where collagen network were shown to be interactively
remodeled by stromal cells. Here, we further deﬁned the gel recipe by
adding hyaluronic acid, which is an important ECM component for
moisture reservation during epithelial development; hence, such
hybrid hydrogel is composed of collagen type I, alginate and hya-
luronic acid (CAH gel). Different from the existing organoid systems,
by incorporating human nasal epithelial progenitor cell (hNEPC) cul-
ture technique in CAH gel, we have successfully produced an apical-
out airway organoid culture system that maintains the ability of
organoids to proliferate and grow outward into branched structures as
differentiating into ciliated cells or goblet cells. We found that the
expression and activity of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) was ele-
vated during organoid differentiation accompanied with gel degra-
dation on the surface; while inhibition of MMP activity signi ﬁcantly
suppressed the ciliation in organoids but promoted the increase of
mucus secreting cell. Consistentﬁndings were found in inﬂammatory
nasal mucosa, showing that a decrease of MMP7, MMP9, MMP10, and
MMP13 expressions in the epithelium with goblet cell hyperplasia
compared to normal ciliated epithelium. The aboveﬁndings indicate a
broad application of our system in studying the mechanisms under-
lying airway epithelial development during normal and disease stages
in a clinical relevant manner.
Results
Establishment of CAH gel based human apical-out nasal orga-
noids (hANOs)
We have collected nasal mucosa biopsies from patients with chronic
rhinosinusitis under functional endoscopic surgery. Epithelial cells
were isolated through mechanical disruption and enzymatic dissocia-
tion of tissue samples. hNEPCs were grown in a feeder-based system as
referred by previous airway epithelial stem cell studies
24– 26.B a s e do n
our experience with biomaterials in 3D in vitro cell culture 22,23,w e
designed a hybrid CAH gel containing collagen type I (C), alginate (A),
and hyaluronic acid (H), in which the collagen and hyaluronic acid
represent the common ECM components in airway mucosal tissues27.
We then customized the CAH hydrogel combined with hNEPC culture
conditions and established a nasal organoid system: (1) hNEPCs in CAH
gel were proliferating and extending in random directions, then
forming into 3D branched structures from day 5 to day 10 in epithelial
growth media (Fig. 1A, Supplementary Fig. 1 and Supplementary
Movie 1); (2). Once the organoids reached high density, the culture
condition was changed to the differentiation media, and the nasal
organoids gradually transformed into a spheroid-type morphology
from day 11 to day 17 (Fig.1A, Supplementary Fig. 1 and Supplementary
Movie 2); (3) The organoids further aggregated and partially merged
into bigger spheroids from day 18 to day 24 (Fig. 1A, Supplementary
Fig. 1 and Supplementary Movie 3), and abundant beating cilia
appeared in the organoids (Supplementary Movie 4). We have suc-
cessfully generated 20 lines of differentiated apical-out nasal orga-
noids from 20 different donors, indicating the robustness and
reproducibility of the current system.
Compared to those Matrigel based apical-in lung organoids that
often maintain a clear hollow lumen (Figures as shown in literature
report
19), the current differentiated nasal organoids show a solid cel-
lular sphere and lack a discernible central lumen (Fig.1A). This pattern
under bright ﬁeld microscopy is also similar with the recent report
showing solid spheres in Matrigel based apical-in nasal organoids 28.
The 3D immuno ﬂuorescence images captured by multiphoton
microscope showed that during proliferation stage the major cell type
belongs to basal cells (p63
+ cells) (Fig.1A). During differentiation stage,
goblet cells (MUC5AC+ secreting cells) appearedﬁrst on around day 17,
and ciliated cells (βIV-tubulin+ or FOXJ1+) markedly present on around
day 24; at this stage p63+ basal or progenitor cells decreased (Fig. 1A,
B). In differentiated stage, the apical tight junctions also formed, as
indicated by the tight junction protein (ZO-1) (Fig.1B, Supplementary
Fig. 2); while other epithelial cell type like club cells was also identiﬁed
in the organoids (Supplementary Fig. 2). The z-plane view of the
staining images displayed a few of small lumens inside the differ-
entiated organoid. Cilia structure protein (βIV-tubulin) staining of the
organoid border clearly revealed that the apical surfaces of organoids
faced outward, and hence we called them human apical-out nasal
organoids (hANOs). Moreover, the multiphoton microscopic images
also indicated that fusion of organoids during late differentiation stage
was mediated via a basal-to-basal docking pattern, but apical sites with
ciliated cells were not merged (Supplementary Fig. 3).
Interestingly, we found that the CAH gel can maintain its integrity
during the proliferation stage (until Day 10); while following the pro-
gression of differentiation, the gel was gradually degraded (Fig.1C). By
using ﬂuorescent probes of Collagen Hybridizing Peptides (F-CHP)
that speci ﬁcally bind to denatured collagen strands (i.e., degraded
collagen) but do not bind to intact collagens
29, we showed that the
signals of F-CHP were signiﬁcantly enhanced in differentiated hANOs
(Day 24) when compared to proliferated hANOs (Day 10) (Fig. 1C, D).
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-44488-1
Nature Communications|          (2024) 15:143 2

<<<PAGE 3>>>
Fig. 1 | Characterization of hANOs during epithelial differentiation.
A, B Representative pictures of hANOs morphology (by brightﬁeld microscopy, at
100x and 200x magniﬁcation, respectively) and candidate markers (p63,βIV-
tubulin, MUC5AC, FOXJ1, and ZO-1) of hANO development (by multiphoton
microscopy) at different stages of hANO differentiation (D10, D17, and D24). Time
lapse microscopy videos for hANOs in different differentiation stages shown in
Supplementary Movie 1 to 3; Cilia beating patterns of hANOs shown in
Supplementary Movie 4.C Gel degradation and F-CHP at different stages of hANO
differentiation (D10, D17, and D24).D Collagen degradation was analyzed by
quantifying the ratio of F-CFP/Collagen gel signals; the Mann– Whitney test was
used in comparison analysis; data present the median with interquartile range,n =8
experiments per condition; the experiment was independently performed in three
organoid lines from three different donors; ns, not signiﬁcant.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-44488-1
Nature Communications|          (2024) 15:143 3

<<<PAGE 4>>>
These ﬁndings indicate that degradation of the gel may generate some
empty space, in which the apical layers of organoids can orientate
towards the lumen.
Collectively, we successfully developed apical-out upper airway
organoids with mucociliary differentiation in a Matrigel alternative and
degradable gel system in which this system could recapitulate the 3D
structural characteristics and the cellular composition of human nasal
epithelium.
hANO establishment by collection of epithelial cells from nasal
mucosa using brushing technique
To test the applicability of CAH gel culture system to other sources of
epithelial cells, we collected nasal epithelial cells from the middle
turbinate of CRS patients ( n = 2) and control subjects ( n =2 ) u s i n g a
nasal brushing technique. The cells from mucosal surface were
obtained by a brush and then the total epithelial cells (CD45-CD90-
CD142+) were sorted via ﬂow cytometry. The isolated epithelial cells
(in an optimal density 5 × 10^4 per well) were directly cultured in the
hybrid hydrogel system without pre-2D expansion procedure. The cell
units grew in a branched structure at proliferation stage; during dif-
ferentiation stage, the gel is also degraded, and the organoids became
spheroid-like morphology with beating cilia facing outward (Supple-
mentary Fig. 4). Thus, we con ﬁrm the hANOs can be generated by
using the epithelial cells collected by minimally invasive approach.
Molecular characteristics and features of hANOs during differ-
entiation progression
To examine changes in genes expression proﬁles during the develop-
ment of hANOs, RNA-seq analysis was performed at three different
time points: the end of proliferation (Day 10), differentiating stage
(Day 17), and differentiated stage (Day 24). Based on unsupervised
principal component analysis (PCA) and Heatmap analysis, the indivi-
dual samples were separated into three distinct groups that corre-
sponded with the three differentiation stages (Fig.2A, B). Differentially
expressed genes (DEGs) in hANOs at the three differentiation steps
were analyzed. There were 3251 up-regulated gens and 2082 down-
regulated genes in hANOs on Day 24 compared with those on Day 10
(Fig. 2C, Supplementary Data 1). To gain an understanding of the
biological functions occurring during the differentiation of hANOs, we
performed gene ontology (GO) analysis, gene set enrichment analysis
(GSEA), and pathway analysis. Of the top 10 terms that deﬁne relevant
biological processes, most were related to ciliogenesis (e.g., cilium
organization, cilium assembly, microtubule-based movement etc.) and
cell cycle regulation (e.g., nuclear division, DNA replication, and
chromosome segregation, etc.), while two categories were associated
with ECM assembly (extracellular matrix organization, extracellular
structure organization) (Fig. 2D). KEGG analysis revealed that path-
ways related to cell cycle, ECM-receptor interaction, Rap1 signaling
were involved in the entire differentiation process, while MAPK sig-
naling and Calcium signaling were associated with the stages of full
differentiation (Fig.2D). GSEA results demonstrated that during early
differentiation (Day 17 vs. Day 10), the functional activities of mitotic
sister chromatid segregation, cell cycle checkpoint and cell cycle
phase transition were signi ﬁcantly decreased (Fig. 2D); while when
hANOs were fully differentiated, activities with cilium movement,
axoneme assembly, and cilium organization were signi ﬁcantly
enhanced (Fig. 2D). Interestingly, the collagen-catabolic process that
involves MMP family members was signi ﬁcantly activated during the
differentiation progression (Fig. 2D). Finally, a decrease of cell pro-
liferation associated genes (e.g.,TP63, NOTCH1, MKI67,a n d MYC)b u t
Fig. 2 | Molecular characteristics of hANO development. A, B PCA plots show
distinct molecular proﬁles during hANOs differentiation.C Volcano plots show the
differentially expressed genes in differentiating (D17) or differentiated (D24) cells
versus proliferated cells (D10). Differentially expressed genes in different stages of
hANOs shown in Supplementary Data 1. D Biological process, KEGG analysis, and
GSEA analysis demonstrate the relevant functional terms in different differentiation
stages of hANOs. E Heatmap demonstrates key genes associated with airway epi-
thelial proliferation and differentiation based on RNAseq analysis. The values in
heatmaps are the log2-scaled RNA-seq read counts.n = 3 experiment per condition;
the experiment was independently performed in three organoid lines from three
different donors.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-44488-1
Nature Communications|          (2024) 15:143 4

<<<PAGE 5>>>
an increase of genes related to airway epithelial cell differentiation
(e.g., FOXJ1, TP73, ALDH1A1,a n d KRT8) was observed following orga-
noid differentiation (Fig. 2E). Taken together, the RNA-seq results
suggested the role of cell cycle and ciliogenesis during differentiation
stages of hANOs. Moreover, the data suggested that the functional
activities related to ECM assembly and collagen catabolic process may
contribute to the degradation phenotype of CAH gel during epithelial
differentiation.
Comparisons of molecular characteristics of nasal epithelial
differentiation in hANOs versus air-liquid interface (ALI) model
ALI is a well-known model to induce airway epithelial differentiation.
By using the same hNEPCs culture methods, progenitor cells were
transferred to a transwell system and then differentiated into muco-
ciliated cell types. Similar to hANO setting, RNA-seq experiment was
performed at the end of proliferation (Day 7), differentiating stage
(Day 14), and differentiated stage (Day 21). There were 5434 and 7801
DEGs at differentiating and differentiated stage respectively as com-
pared to proliferation stage; and the GO analysis present signi ﬁcant
ciliogenesis related functions during differentiation progression
(Supplementary Fig. 5). We then compared the similarity of the epi-
thelial development pro ﬁles between hANO and ALI models. The
results showed that at differentiating and differentiated stages the
overlapping DEGs of these two models were 4541 (82% among the total
DEGs) and 7025 (88% among the total DEGs), respectively (Supple-
mentary Fig. 5). Importantly, both organoid and ALI systems show an
alteration of ECM organization related functional terms during epi-
thelial differentiation; gropus of ECM related genes were signiﬁcantly
changed in a similar trend at proliferation and differentiation status
(Supplementary Fig. 5). The above ﬁndings show similar molecular
characteristics of the epithelial cells between current hANOs and tra-
ditional ALI model, suggesting that the presence of biological func-
tions (like ECM assembly/disassembly) is not an artifact of the culture
in this CAH gel system.
Increased expression and activity of MMPs (MMP7, MMP9,
MMP10, and MMP13) in hANOs during differentiation
MMPs are zinc-dependent proteases that are responsible for degrad-
ing ECM components (including collagens) in many tissues 6,9,30.A s
collagen assembly and disassembly systems can be modulated by
different MMP family members, we assumed that the degradation of
the current CAH gel system could be attributed to certain MMPs
produced by nasal epithelial cells during the differentiation process.
Based on the RNA-seq analysis, we identiﬁed potential MMP can-
didates by examination of the genes in categories related to ECM
organization. We screened MMP genes based on their changes in
expression levels with high statistical signi ﬁcance between differ-
entiation (D17 and D24) and proliferation (D10) stages (Supplementary
Table 1); and then shortlisted several MMP members with signi ﬁcant
up-regulation trend during the progression of differentiation, includ-
ing MMP7, MMP9, MMP10, and MMP13 (Fig.3A). We further validated
their mRNA and protein expression levels. mRNA levels of MMP7,
MMP9, MMP10,a n d MMP13 were signiﬁcantly up-regulated in differ-
entiating (Day 17) and differentiated (Day 24) stages as compared to
the end of proliferation stage (Day 10) (Fig. 3B). By using Luminex
assay, the production of MMP7, MMP9, MMP10, and MMP13 proteins
was also signiﬁcantly increased in the supernatants of hANOs during
the differentiation process (Day 24 or Day 17 versus Day 10) (Fig.3C). In
addition, the protease activity of total MMPs was analyzed, and hANOs
in differentiating status (Day 17) had a signi ﬁcantly lower proteolytic
activity as compared to differentiated hANOs (Day 24) (Fig. 3D). The
above results indicate that epithelia-derived MMP7, MMP9, MMP10,
and MMP13 are involved in the degradation of collagen gel during
differentiation of hANOs.
MMP genes expression was also validated in other airway epi-
thelial culture systems, including ALI and Matrigel model. Following
differentiation progression, mRNA levels ofMMP7, MMP9, MMP10,a n d
MMP13 were signiﬁcantly up-regulated in ALI; while except MMP7, the
other three MMP genes showed an up-regulation trend in Matrigel
(B)
(C) (D)
(A)
S1.D10
S2.D10
S3.D10
S1.D17
S2.D17
S3.D17
S1.D24
S2.D24
S3.D24
MMP7
MMP9
MMP10
MMP13
−0.5
−1.0
−1.5
0
0.5
1.0
D10             D17             D24
D10 D17 D24
10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
101
Relative mRNA level
(Normalized by PGK1)
MMP7
pġ0.001
D10 D17 D24
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
101
Relative mRNA level
(Normalized by PGK1)
MMP9
p=0.009
D10 D17 D24
10-5
10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
101
Relative mRNA level
(Normalized by PGK1)
MMP13
pġ0.001
D10 D17 D24
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
Concentration (pg/ml)
MMP7
p=0.005
D10 D17 D24
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
Concentration (pg/ml)
MMP9
p=0.005
D10 D17 D24
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
Concentration (pg/ml)
MMP10
p=0.005
D10 D17 D24
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
Concentration (pg/ml)
MMP13
p=0.005
20min 40min 60min
0.0
5.0 107
1.0 108
1.5 108
2.0 108
2.5 108
RFU
(Ex/Em=490/525)
MMPs activity
D10
D17
D24
Negative control-1
Negative control-2
Positive control
p=0.010
pġ0.001
D10 D17 D24
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
101
Relative mRNA level
(Normalized by PGK1)
MMP10
pġ0.001
Fig. 3 | Expression and activity of MMPs during hANO development. AHeatmap
shows expression levels of MMP7, MMP9, MMP10 and MMP13 based on RNA-seq
data. B mRNA levels of MMP7, MMP9, MMP10,a n dMMP13 were analyzed in hANOs
at D10, D17 and D24 by qPCR assay; the experiment was independently performed
in ﬁve organoid lines from ﬁve different donors.C Protein levels of MMP7, MMP9,
MMP10, and MMP13 were analyzed in hANOs at D10, D17 and D24 by Luminex
assay; the experiment was independently performed in four organoid lines from
four different donors.D Pan-MMP activity was analyzed in hANOs at D10, D17, and
D24, Pan-MMP activity was analyzed in hANOs at D10, D17, and D24; NC-1 and NC-2
were negative controls in which the organoids treated with culture medium and
assay buffer, respectively; while PC was the positive control in which the organoids
treated with APMA pre-treated MMP9 recombinant protein; RFU relativeﬂuores-
cence units; data present the mean with SEM,n = 5 experiments per condition; the
experiment was independently performed inﬁve organoid lines fromﬁve different
donors. The Friedman test was used in comparison analysis in (B)a n d(C); the 2way
ANOVA with Tukey’ s multiple comparison test was performed in (D).
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-44488-1
Nature Communications|          (2024) 15:143 5

<<<PAGE 6>>>
model (Supplementary Fig. 6). Theseﬁndings indicate that production
of MMP genes in airway epithelial cells during differentiation is a
general phenomenon and it is not induced by the current hydrogel
condition.
Epithelial-derived MMP activity is required for normal muco-
ciliary differentiation of hANOs
To determine whether hANO differentiation was dependent on MMP
protease activity, organoids were cultured in the presence of MMP
inhibitor (actinonin) from Day 10 (i.e., the end of proliferation culture).
There was a signiﬁcant decrease of MMP activity in hANOs treated with
actinonin during the differentiating (Day 17) and differentiated (Day
24) stages (Fig. 4A). Based on the microscopic observation, we found
that the organoids treated MMP inhibitor showed less spheroid-type
morphology (i.e., maintaining the branched structure) during the dif-
ferentiating period (from Day 11 to Day 17) as compared to the
untreated organoids (Supplementary Fig. 7); on Day 24, although both
actinonin treated and untreated organoids displayed similar size of
merged spheroids, interestingly, fewer beating cilia were observed in
actinonin treated organoids (Supplementary Fig. 7 and Supplementary
Movie 5).
By evaluating the percentages of ciliated cells and goblet cells as
well as the expression levels of their respective speci ﬁc candidates
(Foxj1 and MUC5AC), hANOs treated with actinonin showed a sig-
niﬁcant reduction in cilia formation; however, these hANOs showed
enhanced goblet cell proportion (Fig. 4B– D). With regard to the gel
degradation, organoids treated with MMP inhibitor appeared to show
a delayed degradation of collagen compared to the untreated orga-
noids, as seen on the gels and CHP data (Fig.4E– G). The above results
revealed that inhibition of MMP activity could reduce the ciliation of
organoids, and lead to an abnormal differentiation phenotype, i.e., a
relative increase in the number of goblet cells.
RNA-seq analysis was utilized to further characterize the mole-
cular proﬁles in hANOs treated with MMP inhibitor versus those that
were untreated. The PCA plots and Heatmap displayed that treated
and untreated hANOs were separated into different clusters (Fig. 5A,
B). There were 468 differentiated genes (129 up-regulated, 339 down-
regulated) and 1766 differentiated genes (438 up-regulated, 1328
down-regulated) in hANOs treated with MMP inhibitor compared to
the untreated ones at Day 17 and Day 24, respectively (Fig. 5C, Sup-
plementary Data 2). GO analysis showed that these genes were most
enriched in ciliogenesis- related functions categories in actinonin
treated hANOs versus those untreated (Fig.5D). GSEA results indicated
that when comparing MMP inhibitor-treated organoids versus
untreated organoids, the cilium assembly activity was decreased and
the activities of extracellular matrix assembly was enhanced; more-
over, the functions of host defense response and Wnt signaling path-
way were activated in actinonin-treated organoids compared to
untreated organoids at differentiated stage (Day 24) (Fig. 5D). In
actinonin-treated versus untreated hANOs, there was a signi ﬁcant
downregulation of signature ciliogenesis-related genes such asFOXJ1,
DNAAF1, DNAH5, DNAH12 and TUBB4B, but an upregulation of genes
contributing to goblet cell differentiation or mucus function were
signiﬁcantly up-regulated, such as SPDEF, IL-13, FOXA3, MUC5AC and
MUC5B (Fig. 5E). Therefore, the molecular characteristics of hANOs
treated with MMP inhibitor suggest a suppression of ciliogenesis but
also an enhancement of the mucus-secreting cells. These data are
consistent with the expected change of cellular phenotypes.
The ciliation process of airway epithelium is dependent on MMP
activity in ALI and apical-in organoid model
To validate the above ﬁndings of hANOs, we further investigate the
role of MMPs on ciliogenesis of nasal epithelium in ALI and Matrigel
system. By using hNEPCs in Matrigel culture conditions based on the
manufacture’ s protocols, differentiated nasal organoids were
successfully established. Under bright ﬁeld microscope view, the
organoids maintained solid cellular spheres without a clear central
lumen throughout proliferation and differentiation stages, in which
this pattern was similar to those reported in the literature
28.T h eg e l
was intact without any degradation. The cross-sectional images of
organoids showed an apical-in polarity with the ciliated cells oriented
inwardly (Supplementary Fig. 8). When applying MMP inhibitor in the
cells in ALI and Matrigel model from the initiation of differentiation,
the proportion of ciliated cells as well as the signature geneFOXJ1 was
signiﬁcantly decreased compared to the untreated cells; while the
percentages of goblet cells appear to be unchanging in the actinonin
treated model versus the untreated model (Supplementary Fig. 8).
Taking together, these results are in consistent with the presented
hydrogel-based apical-out organoids, conﬁrming the important roles
of MMPs in airway ciliation process, and highlighting the normal air-
way epithelial differentiation is dependent on MMP activity.
Down-regulation of MMPs in goblet cell hyperplasia in chronic
inﬂammatory nasal mucosa
To examine whether epithelial-derived MMPs are involved in epithelial
remodeling in airway mucosa, we used mucosa from nasal polyps to
evaluate the expression levels of MMP7, MMP9, MMP10, and MMP13 in
normal epithelium (from control subjects) versus epithelium with
goblet cell hyperplasia (from CRS patients). Masson staining results
displayed that the basement membrane beneath epithelium that is
mainly composed of collagens was thicker in goblet cell hyperplastic
epithelium than in the normal epithelium (Fig. 6), indicating that an
increase of collagen deposition may be related to abnormal epithelial
remodeling. Staining of MMP proteins demonstrated that MMP7,
MMP9, MMP10, and MMP13 were mainly located in ciliated cells and
some basal cells in normal epithelium (Fig.6); while in epithelium with
goblet cell metaplasia, expression levels of MMP7, MMP9 and MMP13
were signiﬁcantly down-regulated as compared to normal epithelium
covered by ciliated cells (Fig. 6). It appeared that MMP10 universally
expressed in both normal and metaplastic epithelium (Fig. 6). Other
than epithelial region, we found that these MMP proteins also localized
in certain types of immune cells in sub-epithelial region (Fig.6). Taken
together, epithelium-derived MMP expression patterns in in vivo tis-
sues showed similar changes to those observed in hANO models, and
supported the in vitro ﬁndings that up-regulation of MMP (MMP7,
MMP9 and MMP13) expression is associated with airway epithelial
ciliogenesis, but that inhibition of MMPs may contribute to an abnor-
mal differentiation pattern, namely an increase of the number of
goblet cells.
Speciﬁc MMPs are essential for ciliated cell differentiation
of hANOs
We further clarify that the mucociliary development of hANOs might
be attributed to particular MMP. Based on commercial availability of
inhibitory compounds or neutralizing antibodies for speci ﬁc MMPs,
we selected inhibitors for MMP9 and MMP13, respectively, and
neutralizing antibodies for MMP7 and MMP10, respectively. The
differentiation phenotypes of hANOs were compared in the orga-
noids in presence with MMP9 inhibitor, MMP13 inhibitor, MMP7
neutralizing antibody and MMP10 neutralizing antibody versus
untreated organoids. The extent of CAH gel degradation in orga-
noids treated with MMP13 inhibitor was comparable to those seen in
untreated organoids; while the treatment with MMP9 inhibitor and
neutralizing antibody for MMP7 or MMP10 showed less gel degra-
dation than seen in untreated organoids (Fig. 7A). Immuno-
ﬂuorescent staining displayed that the treatment with MMP9
inhibitor and neutralizing antibody for MMP7 or MMP10 signiﬁcantly
reduced the ability of organoids to differentiate into ciliated cells
as compared to those untreated or organoids treated with
MMP13 inhibitor (Fig. 7B– D). When comparing goblet cells in
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-44488-1
Nature Communications|          (2024) 15:143 6

<<<PAGE 7>>>
untreated organoids, organoids treated with MMP9 inhibitor showed
an increase of goblet cell percentage, but organoids treated with
MMP13 inhibitor, neutralizing antibody for MMP7 or MMP10 didn ’ t
have signi ﬁcant effect on goblet cell differentiation (Fig. 7B– D).
Quantitative PCR also showed a down-regulation of ciliated cell sig-
nature genes (FOXJ1) in MMP9 inhibitor-treated organoids, MMP7 or
MMP10 neutralizing antibody treated organoids when compared to
untreated controls; while up-regulation of mucin genes (MUC5AC)
produced by goblet cells was only found in organoids treated with
MMP9 inhibitor versus untreated organoids (Fig. 7E). We further
tested the application of siRNA assay in hANO model by applying
siRNA for MMP9 in organoids during the differentiation progression.
The knockdown ef ﬁciency of MMP9 siRNA in differentiated orga-
noids was about 33%; while we still found a delay of gel degradation
and reduction of ciliated cell proportion in organoids treated with
siRNA-MMP9 compared to those with negative control siRNA (Sup-
plementary Fig. 9). The above ﬁndings suggest that the normal
mucociliary differentiation especially ciliation of hANOs could be
ġ
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-44488-1
Nature Communications|          (2024) 15:143 7

<<<PAGE 8>>>
Fig. 4 | Characterization of hANOs treated with MMP inhibitor. AMMP activity
was measured in actinonin treated and untreated hANOs, data present the mean
with SEM, n = 4 experiments per condition; the experiment was independently
performed in three organoid lines from three different donors.B Representative
pictures of candidate cellular markers (βIV-tubulin and MUC5AC) of hANO (by
multiphoton microscopy and immunoﬂuorescent microscopy) in differentiated
hANOs (D24) treated with actinonin versus untreated organoids.C, D βIV-tubulin+
cells, MUC5AC+ cells and mRNA expression ofFOXJ1 and MUC5ACwere compared in
actinonin-treated to untreated hANOs; for positive cell analysis, data present the
median with interquartile,n = 9 experiments per condition; for qPCR analysis, data
present the mean with SD, n = 6 experiments per condition; the above two
experiments were independently performed in three organoid lines from three
different donors. E, F Gel degradation and F-CHP in differentiating (D17) and dif-
ferentiated (D24) hANOs treated with actinonin versus untreated organoids.
G Collagen degradation was analyzed by quantifying the ratio of F-CFP/Collagen gel
signals, data present the median with interquartile,n = 9 experiments per condi-
tion; the experiment was independently performed in three organoid lines from
three different donors. The 2way ANOVA with Tukey’ s multiple comparison test
was performed in (A); the Mann– Whitney test was used in comparison analysis in
(C), (D)a n d(G); ns not signiﬁcant.
Fig. 5 | Molecular characteristics of hANOs treated with actinonin. A, B PCA
plots and Heatmap show distinct molecular proﬁles in actinonin-treated versus
untreated hANOs; the values in heatmaps are the log2-scaled RNA-seq read counts.
C Volcano plots show the differentially expressed genes in actinonin-treated versus
untreated hANOs. Differentially expressed genes in actinonin-treated versus
untreated hANOs shown in Supplementary Data 2. D Biological process and GSEA
analysis demonstrates the changes of key relevant functional terms in actinonin-
treated versus untreated hANOs.E Heatmap demonstrats key genes associated
with ciliated cells and goblet cells in hANOs treated with and without actinonin
during epithelial differentiation.n = 3 experiments per condition; the experiment
was independently performed in three organoid lines from three different donors.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-44488-1
Nature Communications|          (2024) 15:143 8

<<<PAGE 9>>>
dependent on speci ﬁc types of MMP, e.g., the MMP9, MMP7
and MMP10.
Discussion
This study presents an apical-out airway organoid by using a de ﬁned
hybrid hydrogel system. By utilizing this system, we have revealed a
mechanism by which the epithelial-derived MMPs are required for air-
way epithelial ciliation, and the consequent effect of MMPs is associated
with ECM (like collagen) degradation which could determine the epi-
thelial polarity (Fig.8). The CAH gel-based hANO model could recapi-
tulate aspects of cellular complexity, structural characteristics, and the
developmental properties of native nasal epithelium.
The degradation of ECM such as collagen is important for many
tissues/organs development
9, but related studies in airway epithelium
formation remain inclusive. Here we show that during differentiation,
the polarization of airway epithelium needs to degrade collagen, and
consequently creates a lumen within the gel, which facilitates the
apical-out polarity of mucociliary cell differentiation. Interestingly, a
study done in human enteroids also reports that manual removal of
ECM proteins can reverse the organoid polarity from basal-out to
apical-out orientation
31. In addition, recent two studies present the
airway apical-out organoids can be generated by using ECM-free
system
20,21.B o t ho u rﬁndings and the literature reports indicate that
reduced or minimal ECM approaches are essential to drive apical-out
polarity in airway organoid cultures.
So far there are two methods have been introduced to create
apical-out orientation of airway organoids, including ECM-free and
modiﬁed Matrigel systems. Some former studies have indicated a free-
ﬂoating airway apical-out epithelial spheroids, in which this is similar to
the recent ECM-free method
32. Stroulios et al. and Wijesekara et al.
have described an ECM-free with low-adherence microwell method to
generate the organoids with apical-out pattern
20,21. However, orga-
noids in these ECM-free systems present a ciliated cell predominance
phenotype, and fail to differentiate goblet cells and also don’ tc o n t a i n
basal cells or club cells; and no ECM around the organoids also implies
that such system could not mimic the physiological environment in
tissues. Boekig et al. has reported a two-phase culture system in a
transwell insert (air-gel interface), that is, expansion and differentia-
tion culture
33. The epithelial cell units proliferate in mixed matrix gel
components (2:1 mixture of collagen and Matrigel) for 14 days; then
cell units are released by gel digestion and re-suspended in collagen for
differentiation culture (another 28 days), and the organoids develop to
a polarized epithelium with outwardly facing apical membranes; while
the replating manipulation causes a substantial loss of organoid units
(about 60%). Moreover, this model also lacks differentiated goblet
cells. Goblet cell is one major functional cell type in airway epithelium,
and mucus secretion is a critical response of epithelium to pathogens
or environmental factors
34,35. The absence of secretory cell lineage
suggests that these apical-out organoid models could not fully repre-
sent the cellular composition of native epithelium, so that it would
limit their application in studying airway epithelial development
(especially those related to goblet cell differentiation) and also the
application in elucidating the mechanisms of epithelial mucus pro-
duction during pathogen-host interaction.
The current hANOs can mimic certain morphological and struc-
tural characteristics of native airway epithelium from proliferation to
differentiation. The organoids exhibit branching morphogenesis in 3D
in vitro environment during the proliferation stage, which may
represent the morphological patterns of epithelial cell growth and
migration in vivo tissues. One interesting phenomenon found in this
organoid model is that following differentiation ECM is gradually
degraded, and organoids can move and merge into larger spheroid-
like structures. The recent developmental studies done in chick lungs
have reported that the continuous network of airway is generated by
large-scale epithelial fusion events
36,37. During this fusion process,
epithelial basal cells can contact each other at the fusion site, while the
apical polarity is maintained (i.e., those differentiating or differ-
entiated cells still locate at the apical layers); meanwhile, ECM around
Fig. 6 | Evaluation of basement membrane and MMP expression in normal
epithelium and epithelium with goblet cell hyperplasia in nasal mucosa.
Representative pictures of MMP7, MMP9, MMP10, and MMP13 in normal and
remodeled nasal epithelium. Thickness of basement membrane and MMP protein
levels were compared between normal and goblet cell hyperplastic epithelium.
Data present the median with interquartile,n = 14 experiments per group; the
experiment was independently performed in tissues fromﬁve CRS patients andﬁve
control subjects, respectively. The Mann– Whitney test was used in comparison
analysis. ns not signiﬁcant.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-44488-1
Nature Communications|          (2024) 15:143 9

<<<PAGE 10>>>
βIV-Tubulin+ cells Mucin5AC+ cells
(E)
(F)
UT MMP13
inhibitor
MMP9
inhibitor
0
10
20
30Positive cell staining(%)
ns
p<0.001
0
5
10
15
20
ns
p=0.008
UT MMP13
inhibitor
MMP9
inhibitor
0
2
4
6
8
FOXJ1
Relative mRNA level
(Normalized by PGK1)
ns
p=0.007
UT MMP13
inhibitor
MMP9
inhibitor
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
ns
p=0.039
UT MMP13
inhibitor
MMP9
inhibitor
Relative mRNA level
(Normalized by PGK1)
0
10
20
30
p=0.008
p=0.001
UT MMP7 
βIV-Tubulin+ cells
MMP10
MUC5AC
0
5
10
15
ns
ns
Mucin5AC+ cells
UT
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
p=0.023
p=0.033
FOXJ1
Relative mRNA level
(Normalized by PGK1)
UT
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
p=0.019
ns
MUC5AC
Neutralizing antibody
MMP7 MMP10
Neutralizing antibody
MMP7 MMP10
Neutralizing antibody
UT MMP7 MMP10
Neutralizing antibody
Relative mRNA level
(Normalized by PGK1)
(A) UT MMP9 inhibitorMMP13 inhibitor
UT MMP10 MMP7
Neutralizing antibody
Mucin5AC/βIV-Tubulin/DAPI(B)
UT MMP9 inhibitorMMP13 inhibitor
Single z-plane3D Maximum intensity 
of z-stack
(C) Mucin5AC/βIV-Tubulin/DAPI
UT MMP10 MMP7
Neutralizing antibody
Single z-plane3D Maximum intensity 
of z-stack
Mucin5AC/βIV-Tubulin/DAPI
UT MMP9 inhibitor MMP13 inhibitor
(D)
UT MMP10 MMP7
Neutralizing antibodyPositive cell staining(%)
Positive cell staining(%)
Positive cell staining(%)
50μm 50μm 50μm
50μm 50μm 50μm
50μm 50μm 50μm
50μm 50μm 50μm
50μm 50μm 50μm
50μm 50μm 50μm
100μm100μm 100μm
100μm 100μm 100μm
Fig. 7 | Characterization of hANOs treated with MM9 or MMP13 speciﬁci n h i -
bitor, and neutralizing antibody of MMP7 or MMP10. A– D Representative pic-
tures of gel degradation and candidate cellular markers (βIV-tubulin and MUC5AC)
of hANO (by multiphoton microscopy and immunoﬂuorescent microscopy) in
differentiated hANOs (D24) treated with MMP9 or MMP13 speciﬁc inhibitor, and
MMP7 or MMP10 neutralizing antibody versus untreated organoids.E, F βIV-
tubulin+ cells, MUC5AC+ cells, and mRNA expression of FOXJ1 and MUC5AC were
compared in hANOs treated with MMP9 or MMP13 speciﬁc inhibitor, and MMP7 or
MMP10 neutralizing antibody versus untreated hANOs, for positive cell analysis,
data present the median with interquartile,n = 9 experiments per condition; for
qPCR analysis, data present the mean with SD,n = 5 experiments per condition. The
experiment was independently performed in three organoid lines from three dif-
ferent donors. The Mann– Whitney test was performed in (E); the unpaired t test
was used in comparison analysis in (F). ns not signiﬁcant.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-44488-1
Nature Communications|          (2024) 15:143 10

<<<PAGE 11>>>
the fusion partners is degraded; ﬁnally, the merged epithelial struc-
tures form a larger scale epithelium. The live videos and multiphoton
microscopy images in the current model also suggest that basal-to-
basal docking probably mediates the organoid fusion process, similar
to the epithelial fusion during lung development in vivo. Therefore, the
hANO model could be a useful in vitro platform to investigate the
cellular mechanism as well as their interaction with ECM during epi-
thelial fusion in airway development.
In this hANO model, human primary nasal epithelial progenitor
cells are incorporated into CAH gel. Airway epithelial progenitor cells
are considered to retain intrinsic growth and differentiation char-
acteristics of respiratory epithelial tissues from which they are derived,
and alteration of epithelial inherent properties could be associated
with the defects in epithelial repair or remodeling in in ﬂamed nasal
mucosa
24,38,39. In this study, nasal epithelial cells from the middle tur-
binate using a minimally invasive brushing technique are compatible
with CAH gel and culture condition; and the isolated cells (about
5 × 10^4) can grow and differentiate into matured nasal organoids
without expansion by serial passages. Thus, the organoids by using
epithelial cells directly derived from nasal mucosa by resected tissues
or brushing method may maintain the phenotypic properties of the
original cells from individual donors. The above characteristics of
hANOs offer potential advantages in that hANOs could be a useful
platform to study the epithelial development in healthy and disease
condition, and test individual local responses to pathogens and drugs,
hence facilitating precision medicine purpose.
hANOs have an outward-facing apical surface with ciliated cells,
which should easily contact various exogenous factors such as bac-
teria, viruses, and environmental elements that could be added to the
culture media. Infection with pathogens in base-out airway organoids
requires a technically challenging method. One needs to extract
organoids from the Matrigel, mechanically shear the cultures to allow
viral access to the apical surface of the organoids, and then re-embed
the organoids in the Matrigel
14,19. Furthermore, in apical-out system the
secretion factors are released into the culture media, where they can
be easily removed or collected for further analysis. Therefore, hANOs
are expected to be a more accessible model to study host-pathogen
interactions and to discern mechanisms of the pathogenesis in airway
epithelium.
Various biomaterials can induce many different cellular behaviors;
therefore, the selection of a certain biomaterial should depend on the
goal of research. There are three reasons why we chose type I collagen
instead of type IV. Firstly, type I collagen is well-known as a pH sensitive
protein that can start gelation under body temperature at neutral pH
condition, while type IV collagen cannot undergo self-gelation and has
been rarely used in 3D cell culture but commonly applied as a coating
for cell attachment
40,41. Secondly, although it is known that the basal
lamina of respiratory epithelium is mainly composed of type IV col-
lagen, type I collagen is still the major type of ECM component around
the epithelium in the respiratory tissue which has signiﬁcant impact on
epithelial development
9,42. More importantly, type I collagen can
facilitate cell migration and can be degraded by MMPs 9,w h i c ht h u s
MMP
MMP inhibitor
Ca
Alginate
Hyaluronic acid
Ciliated cell
Basal cell
CollagenGoblet cell
Collagen IV
Perlecan
Entac/g415n
Lamin
MMP inhibi/g415on
Prolifera/g415on
During diﬀeren/g415a/g415on
(ECM degrada/g415on) Diﬀeren/g415ated stage
CAH gel based Human apical-out nasal organoid
Matrigel based basal-out airway organoid
Ciliated 
epithelium
Goblet cell 
metaplasia
Fig. 8 | Diagram of MMP mechanism on ECM degradation associated with epithelial ciliation and polarity by using current hANO system.Schematic diagram shows
the comparison between CAH gel based hANO and Matrigel based airway organoids, and the roles of MMPs in airway organoid development.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-44488-1
Nature Communications|          (2024) 15:143 11

<<<PAGE 12>>>
promote the outward growth of organoid, leading to the apical-out
orientation. Hence, we choose type I collagen as the major component
of this hydrogel which can better mimic the ECM microenvironment of
airway epithelial tissues.
MMPs play important roles in tissue remodeling, wound healing,
and morphogenesis in respiratory mucosa during both physiological
and inﬂammatory conditions
6,43– 45. The previous studies have mostly
focused on the effects ofﬁbroblast or inﬂammatory cell-derived MMPs
on airway in ﬂammation46– 49, and epithelial-derived MMPs have only
reported in some stimulant-induced cell culture experiments 50– 52.
Nonetheless, the effects and the underlying mechanisms of MMPs on
airway epithelial development and abnormal remodeling remain
poorly understood. Using the hANO model as well as two conventional
3D culture systems (ALI and Matrigel-based apical-in organoids), our
ﬁndings reveal that following differentiation, expression of various
MMP genes (MMP7, MMP9, MMP10, and MMP13) is up-regulated in
nasal epithelial cells, and the normal ciliation process is suppressed by
inhibition of MMP activity, suggesting MMP is functionally required for
nasal epithelial differentiation. Interestingly, when inhibiting MMP
activity in hANO system, the airway epithelial cells display abnormal
differentiation phenotype, i.e., increase the relative number of goblet
cells. The mechanism behind MMP inhibition and its association with
goblet cell differentiation is not investigated in this study; while, the
RNA-seq data suppose certain molecular candidates (e.g., IL-13 and IL-
1β) are up-regulated in actinonin treated organoids, in which these
genes are known factors to induce g oblet cell differentiation. As the
interplay between epithelial cells and the surrounding ECM has
essential roles in determining tissue polarity, the current hANO model
is an ideal system to study the functional interaction between tissue
microenvironment factors (like ECM enzymes) and ECM organization
(such as collagen) on airway epithelial biology.
Our results suggest that the roles of individual MMP family
members on airway epithelia development are different. For instance,
MMP7, MMP9, and MMP10 have signi ﬁcant effects on ciliogenesis of
airway epithelial cells, but MMP13 has a limited impact on it; while only
MMP9 inhibition would lead to increase of goblet cell proportion.
Since this study does not aim to screen the functional effects of spe-
ciﬁc metalloproteinases on epithelial development, we could not
exclude the potential effects of other MMP members as well as other
extracellular proteinases (e.g., A Disintegrin and Metalloproteinase
with Thrombospondin motifs (ADAMTs)) on ECM, morphogenesis and
development of epithelial tissues. Nonetheless, additional studies are
required to validate the mechanisms of speci ﬁc MMPs on regulating
ECM degradation and then impacting airway epithelial development,
by both in vitro and in vivo functional experiments such as conditional
knockout mouse for epithelial speciﬁc MMP (e.g., MMP9).
In sum, the hANO system described here contains the biode-
gradable CAH gel combined with primary nasal epithelial progenitor
cells isolated from human subjects, which enables the recapitulation
and, therefore, advancement of the understanding of airway epithelial
development. We employed hANO model to reveal the essential roles
that epithelia-derived MMPs and collagen degradation process play
important roles in airway epithelial cell fate determination and tissue
polarity. We propose that the hANO platform has the potential to
facilitate future discoveries that would be relevant for a better
understanding of the biology and pathology of human respiratory
tract, e.g., epithelial development, disease modeling, epithelial-
pathogen interaction, and drug screening.
Methods
Human nasal tissues
Nasal samples (from sinus mucosa) were obtained from patients
(n = 23, 16 male/7 female, median age 43) with chronic rhinosinusitis
(CRS) who underwent functional endoscopic sinus surgery in the
Department of Otolaryngology, The First Afﬁliated Hospital, Sun Yat-
sen University (Guangzhou, China). Nasal biopsies (from middle tur-
binate) obtained from subjects (n = 10, 7 males/3 females, median age
36) with nasal septal deviation or nasal fracture that underwent sep-
toplasty surgery served as control mucosa. None of the CRS patients
and controls had immunodeﬁciencies, autoimmune diseases, tumor,
or acute respiratory tract infection 1 month before inclusion. To con-
ﬁrm the subjects without infection was based on patient symptoms
report (including fever, cough, runny nose, sore throat, chest or nasal
congestion, and fatigue) and laboratory tests (nasal swabs sent for
bacterial culture test and nucleic acid ampli ﬁcation tests for SARS-
COV-2). All subjects were carefully selected and only individuals who
did not receive systemic glucocorticoid steroids, antibiotics for
3 months and/or nasal corticosteroids for 1 month before the surgery.
Approval for this study was obtained from the Institutional Review
Board of The First Af ﬁliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University (Project
number [2017] 256). All participants were given written informed
consent. Relevant approvals from China ’ s Ministry of Science and
Technology related to the export of genetic information and materials
relevant to this work was obtained.
Human nasal epithelial progenitor cell (hNEPCs) cultures
Nasal tissues from CRS patients were cut into pieces and processed by
enzymatic digestion with Dispase II (Sigma-Aldrich, St.Louis, MO) at
4 °C overnight. The digested tissue suspension was washed by cold
Dulbecco’ sM o d iﬁed Eagle Medium (DMEM) (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc,
Waltham, MA) and ﬁltered by using 70 μm cell strainers (CORNING,
Corning, NY) to obtain single-cell suspension. The human nasal epi-
thelial progenitor cell (hNEPC) culture method was modiﬁed based on
our previous reports
24,53.B r i eﬂy, primary cells were seeded on the X-ray
treated 3T3 cell feeder and were cultured with in-house serum based
growth medium (including DMEM/F12, fetus bovine serum, cholera
toxin, insulin, EGF, hydrocortisone, 3,3′,5-triiodo-L-thyronine, adenine,
and ROCK inhibitor); only progenitor cells can grow clonally and were
collected after 80% conﬂuence for organoid culture.
hANO cultivation
CAH hydrogel was prepared by modifying the previous protocol 22,23
with addition of hyaluronic acid. hNEPCs were re-suspended in cold
premixed gel solution (1 ml size) which included collagen type I (Ibidi
GmbH, Grafelﬁng, Germany), low viscosity alginic acid sodium salt
stock solution (Sigma-Aldrich), hyaluronic acid (Sigma-Aldrich), 10x
DMEM (60μl) (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc), and growth medium (250μl).
The ﬁnal concentrations of gel components were 3 mg/ml collagen,
5 mg/ml alginate, and 1 mg/ml hyaluronic acid. The premixed solution
(250 μl per dish) with hNEPC suspension was adjusted to neutral pH,
cross-linked with 3.75 mM CaCl
2 (Sigma-Aldrich) and then was gently
placed in a 15 mm glass bottom cell culture dish (Nest Biotechnology,
Wuxi, China). For each culture dish, the number of seeding hNPECs was
1×1 0
4. The above procedures were carried on ice. The premixed gel
solution-hNEPC suspension was incubated for 30 min at 37 °C to soli-
dify the CAH gel; then growth media (500μl) were covered the gel and
the cultures were incubated at 37 °C with 5% CO
2.D u r i n gt h ep r o -
liferation stage (Day 1 to Day 10) of hANOs, growth medium was
replaced every 2 days; during the differentiation stage (Day 11 to Day
24) of hANOs, differentiation medium (500 μl) (PneumaCult ™-ALI
Medium, STEMCELL Technologies, Vancouver, Canada) was changed
every 2 days. The images of organoids were captured by phase-
contrast microscopy using a 10x or 20 x objective on IX51 inverted
microscope (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan). The real-time organoid behavior
was monitored by Lux3 FL live-cell imaging microscope (CytoSMART
Technologies B.V., Eindhoven, The Netherlands). Time-lapse videos
were generated to display the structural changes of organoids over
proliferation and differentiation. The beating cilia of hANOs were
observed and captured by using the Sisson-Ammons Video Analysis
system (SAVA, Omaha, NE)
54.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-44488-1
Nature Communications|          (2024) 15:143 12

<<<PAGE 13>>>
Immunoﬂuorescent (IF) staining and multiphoton microscopy
The primary antibodies for speciﬁc cell types were used to characterize
hANOs: mouse anti-human βIV-Tubulin monoclonal antibody [clone
ONS.1A6], rabbit anti-human ZO-1 polyclonal antibody, rabbit anti-
human Mucin 5AC monoclonal antibody [clone EPR16904], mouse
anti-human p63 monoclonal antibody [clone 4A4], and rabbit anti-
human Foxj1 monoclonal antibody [ clone EPR21874]; all antibodies
were purchased from Abcam (Abcam, Cambridge, UK). The collagen
hybridizing peptide 5-FAM conjugate (F-CHP) was synthesized and
provided by Prof. Yang Li from the Fifth Afﬁliated Hospital of Sun Yat
Sen University (Zhuhai, China)
29.
The organoids with CAH gel were directly ﬁxed by 4% paraf-
ormaldehyde for 30 min and were permeabilized with 0.3% 100x-triton
for 15 min. The organoids were incubated by primary antibodies at 4 °C
overnight (the dilutions of antibodies targeted to p63, βIV-Tubulin,
Mucin 5AC, foxj1, and ZO-1 were 1:100, 1:800, 1:600, 1:1000, and 1:500,
respectively), and then stained with goat anti-mouse Alexa Fluor 488
and goat anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor 594 conjugated secondary antibodies
(Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) in the dark at room temperature for 1 h; the
s a m p l e sw e r et h e ns t a i n e dw i t h4′,6′- diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI)
for visualization of the nuclei;ﬁnally the organoids with CAH gel were
covered by PBS and stored at 4 °C in dark. With regard to the F-CHP
staining, the collagen conjugates were diluted by PBS and heated at
80 °C for 5 min followed by cool-down on ice. The pretreated F-CHP
(5 μM) was incubated in organoids with CAH gel at 4 °C overnight.
Images of the above IF staining in hANOs were captured by using 25x
water immersion objective on a TCS SP8 DIVE multiphoton micro-
scope (Leica, Mannheim, Germany). Images were 3D-reconstructed
using LAS X software (Leica). For analyzing the degree of collagen
degradation, the ratios of F-CHP positive signals to the total hydrogel
signals in three randomly selected ﬁelds were calculated by using
Imaris 8.4 software (Bitplane, Zürich, Switzerland).
Cytospin experiment and cell counting
CAH gel was ﬁrst degraded by sodium citrate (50 mg/ml) and type I
collagenase (1 mg/ml), and organoids were digested by Accutase
(Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁc) to obtain single cell suspension. About
1×1 0
4 resuspended cells in 200μl of PBS were loaded in the cytospin
chamber; cell suspension was centrifuged at 500 g for 5 min by using
Cytospin®4 Cytocentrifuge (Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁc); and then the
cells were collected on glass slides for subsequent IF staining experi-
ment which was described in the above section. Images of samples
stained with speciﬁc markers for ciliated cells (βIV-Tubulin) and goblet
cells (Mucin 5AC) were captured at 200x or 400x magniﬁcation under
DM4B upright microscope (Leica). The βIV-Tubulin
+ or Mucin 5AC +
cells were counted in three randomly selected areas (200x magni ﬁ-
cation) and the percentages of ciliated cells and goblets cells among
total epithelial cells (more than 300 cells totally) were calculated.
RNA-seq experiment and data analysis
RNA from hANOs on Days 10, 17, and 24 was isolated by using Trizol
reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc). RNA quality was checked by Bioa-
nalyzer 2100 system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA). The
library preparation was carried out following the manufacturer’ s pro-
tocol by using NEBNext® UltraTM RNA Library Prep Kit for Illumina®
(NEW ENGLAND BioLabs, Ipswich, MA). cDNA libraries were sequenced
on an Illumina Novaseq platform as 150‐bp pair ended reads (illumina,
San Diego, CA).
Kallisto program was used to quantify the abundances of tran-
scripts from RNA-seq data
55, and the Kallisto index was built with
reference transcriptome GRCh38. Reads per kilobase per million
mapped fragments (RPKM) counts and differential expression of gene
transcripts were estimated using DEseq2 program (Bioconductor,
https://www.bioconductor.org). The difference of transcriptomic data
were analyzed by two-sided Wald test methods and the multiple
comparison correction were analyzed by Benjamini– Hochberg meth-
ods. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were selected based on the
cut-off at aP value of less than 0.05 and the absolute value of Log2 fold
change greater than or equal to 1.5. For intra-group analysis, i.e., dif-
ferent differentiation days of hANOs, DEGs were analyzed in samples
from Day 10, Day 17, and Day24 at pairwise comparison. For inter-
group analysis, i.e., hANOs treated with MMP inhibitor versus
untreated hANOs, DEGs were analyzed between MMP inhibitor treated
and untreated samples on Day 17 or Day 24. ClusterProﬁler program
56
was used to perform enrichment analysis, including Gene Ontology
(GO) term analysis, KEGG pathway analysis and GSEA analysis based on
the DEGs from above intra-group or inter-group comparisons; the
above functional analyses were analyzed by two-sided Over Repre-
sentation Analysis (ORA) with Benjamini– Hochberg multiple compar-
ison correction.
Quantitative RT-PCR
Total RNA was reversed transcripted to cDNA by using PrimeScript RT
kit (Takara, Shiga, Japan) and was subsequently analyzed by quantita-
tive RT-PCR using the FastStart Universal SYBR Green Master (Roche,
Basel, Switzerland). The expression levels of target genes were nor-
malized to housekeeping gene PGK1. Primer sequences for MMP
genes were:
1) MMP7
Sense: GAGTGAGCTACAGTGGGAACA;
Antisense: CTATGACGCGGGAGTTTAACAT;
2) MMP9
Sense: AGACCTGGGCAGATTCCAAAC;
Antisense: CGGCAAGTCTTCCGAGTAGT;
3) MMP10
Sense: TGCTCTGCCTATCCTCTGAGT;
Antisense: TCACATCCTTTTCGAGGTTGTAG;
4) MMP13
Sense: TCCTGATGTGGGTGAATACAAT;
Antisense: GCCATCGTGAAGTCTGGTAAAAT.
Luminex assays
MMP protein levels (MMP7, MMP9, MMP10, and MMP13) in secretion
of hANO cultures were measured by human Magnetic Luminex Per-
formance Assay MMP base kit (R&D systems, Minneapolis, MN) fol-
lowing the manufacturer ’ s instructions. The experiment was
performed by using a Luminex MAGPIX system (Luminex, Austin, TX).
The protein expression levels were measured as mean ﬂuorescence
intensity (MFI) and the concentration of each MMP protein was cal-
culated using a 5-parameter logistic ﬁt curve generated for each ana-
lyte from the standards. The detection sensitivity for each selected
MMP was 6.6 pg/ml (MMP7), 13.7 pg/ml (MMP9), 3.2 pg/ml (MMP10),
and 63.5 pg/ml (MMP13) respectively.
Measurement of MMP activity
The general MMP enzyme activity in hANO supernatants was detected
by using MMP Activity Assay Kit (Abcam), which included a ﬂuores-
cence resonance energy transfer (FRET) peptide as a generic MMP
activity indicator. Recombinant human MMP9 protein (BioLegend, San
Diego, CA) served as positive control, was pre-activated with 1 mM of
4-Aminophenylmercuric Acetate (APMA) for 24 h at 37 °C. The hANO
supernatants, APMA pre-treated MMP9, and negative control (only
culture medium) were added in duplicate into a 96-well plate; MMP
Green substrate was applied into the assay plate; and ﬂuorescence
units were measured using a VICTOR Nivo Multimode Plate Reader
(PerkinElmer, Waltham, MA) at Ex/Em = 490/525 nm.
MMP inhibitory assay in hANOs
The inhibitor for multiple MMP proteases (Actinonin) (Chemical for-
mula C 19H35N3O5, Enzo, Farmingdale, NY), MMP9 speci ﬁci n h i b i t o r
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-44488-1
Nature Communications|          (2024) 15:143 13

<<<PAGE 14>>>
(Chemical formula C16H17F2N3O3S, Sigma-Aldrich), and MMP13 speciﬁc
inhibitor (Chemical formula C22H20F2N4O2, Sigma-Aldrich) were used
to perform MMP inhibition assay. Actinonin can inhibit the activity of
MMP1, MMP2, MMP3, MMP7, MMP8, MMP9, MMP10, MMP12, and
MMP13. hANOs were treated with Actinonin (25 μM), MMP9 inhibitor
(100 μM), and MMP13 inhibitor (10μM) twice a day, respectively, from
Day 10 (when the organoids started differentiation) to Day 24. MMP
activity was measured in the supernatant of hANOs collected on Day 17
and Day 24. The dosages of actinonin, MMP9 speci ﬁc inhibitor and
MMP13 speciﬁc inhibitor were modiﬁed based on the manufacturer’ s
manual and published articles
57– 59.
Masson staining and immunohistochemistry experiment
Nasal tissues were obtained from 6 patients with nasal polyps and 6
control subjects. Samples were ﬁxed with 4% paraformaldehyde and
embedded in paraf ﬁn. Tissue sections were performed Masson Tri-
chrome staining to analyze the thickness of basement membrane
beneath epithelium; while immunohistochemistry (IHC) was used to
evaluate MMP protein expression patterns in normal epithelium and
epithelium with goblet cell hyperplasia. Antibodies used in IHC
experiment were as follows: rabbit anti-human MMP7 monoclonal
antibody [clone EPR17888-71] (Abcam), rabbit anti-human MMP9
monoclonal antibody [clone EP1254] (Abcam), mouse anti-human
MMP10 monoclonal antibody [clone 110304] (R&D systems), and
rabbit anti-human MMP13 monoclonal antibody [clone
EPR21778] (Abcam).
For IHC staining procedures, tissue sections wereﬁrst performed
antigen retrieval step with target retrieval buffer (pH6.0) followed by
incubation with respective primary antibodies for MMP7, MMP9,
MMP10, and MMP13 at 4 °C overnight; and then the sections were
incubated with Dako REALTM EnVisionTM Detection System (Agilent,
Santa Clara, CA) and stained with diaminobenzidine substrates for
color development; all slides were counterstained with hematoxylin.
The evaluation of basement membrane and MMP proteins were
performed in three randomly selected regions at a 200x magniﬁcation
on DM4B upright microscope (Leica). The thickness of basement
membrane was measured by using Image J software. Expression levels
of individual MMP protein was evaluated based on extensity (positive
staining areas of total epithelial area) and intensity (average optical
density) by using Image J software.
Statistics and reproducibility
Unpaired or pairedt test and Mann– WhitneyU test was used to analyze
the signiﬁcance between two groups based on the data distribution,
respectively; Friedman test followed by Dunn’ s multiple comparison
tests was used to analyze the MMP expression data among three
groups; while Two-way ANOVA test followed by Tukey ’ sm u l t i p l e
comparison tests was used to analyze the MMP activity data. All sta-
tistical analyses and graphs were performed by using GraphPad Prism
version 8.0 (GraphPad Software, La Jolla, CA). Thep value is calculated
for a two-tailed test;p < 0.05 was considered as statistically signiﬁcant.
The numbers of images taken for organoids at different condi-
tions are described as bellows.
In Fig. 1A, 5 micrographs of brightﬁeld microscopy were captured
for each time point; 5 multiphotonic graphs of p63 staining were
captured for each time point; 4, 8, and 10 multiphotonic graphs ofβIV-
tubulin and MUC5AC staining were captured for D10, 17 and D24,
respectively. In Figs. 1B, 3 multiphotonic graphs of FOXJ1 and ZO-1
staining were captured for D24. In Fig. 1C, 3 gel degradation graphs
were captured for each time point; 3 micrographs of F-CHP staining
were captured for each time point.
In Fig. 4B, 3 multiphotonic graphs of βIV-tubulin and MUC5AC
staining were captured for untreated (NT) and actinonin treated orga-
noids, respectively. In Fig.4E, 3 gel degradation graphs were captured
for untreated (NT) and actinonin treated organoids, respectively. In
Fig. 4F, 6 micrographs of F-CHP staining were captured for each time
point in organoids treated with and without actinonin, respectively.
In Fig. 7A, 3 gel degradation graphs were captured for untreated
(NT) and speci ﬁc MMP inhibitor treated organoids, respectively. In
Fig. 7B, C, 2 multiphotonic graphs ofβIV-tubulin and MUC5AC staining
were captured for organoids treated with and without speci ﬁcM M P
inhibitors, respectively. In Fig. 7D, 3 micrographs of βIV-tubulin and
MUC5AC staining were captured for organoids treated with and
without speciﬁc MMP inhibitors, respectively.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature
Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
RNA-seq data in this study have been deposited in the Gene Expression
Omnibus (GEO) under series GSE249160 at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE249160. The data supporting the
ﬁndings of this study are available within the article and its supple-
mentary materials. Source data are provided with this paper. The
authors declare that there are no restrictions on the data availability of
the results presented within this study and all material is available
upon request from the corresponding authors. Source data are pro-
vided with this paper.
References
1. Schleimer, RobertP. & Berdnikovs, Sergejs Etiology of epithelial
barrier dysfunction in patients with type 2 inﬂammatory diseases.J.
Allergy Clin. Immunol.139,1 7 5 2–1761 (2017).
2. Heijink, I. H. et al. Epithelial cell dysfunction, a major driver of
asthma development.Allergy 75,1 9 0 2–1917 (2020).
3. Hewitt, R. J. & Lloyd, C. M. Regulation of immune responses by the
airway epithelial cell landscape.Nat. Rev. Immunol. 21,
347–362 (2021).
4. Rock, J. R. & Hogan, B. L. Epithelial progenitor cells in lung devel-
opment, maintenance, repair, and disease.Annu Rev. Cell Dev. Biol.
27, 493–512 (2011).
5. Ghosh, M., Ahmad, S., White, C. W. & Reynolds, S. D. Transplanta-
tion of airway epithelial stem/progenitor cells: a future for cell-
based therapy. Am. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol. 56,1 –10 (2017).
6 . B u r g s t a l l e r ,G . ,O e h r l e ,B . ,G e r c k e n s ,M . ,W h i t e ,E .S . ,S c h i l l e r ,H .B .
& Eickelberg, O. The instructive extracellular matrix of the lung:
basic composition and alterations in chronic lung disease.Eur.
Respir. J. 50, 1601805 (2017).
7 . W e r b ,Z .E C Ma n dc e l ls u r f a c ep roteolysis: regulating cellular
ecology. Cell 91,4 3 9–442 (1997).
8 . W a t t ,F .M .&H u c k ,W .T .R o l eo ft h ee x t r a c e l l u l a rm a t r i xi nr e g -
ulating stem cell fate. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 14,4 6 7–473 (2013).
9. Bonnans, C., Chou, J. & Werb, Z. Remodelling the extracellular
matrix in development and disease.Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 15,
786–801 (2014).
10. Theocharis, A. D., Manou, D. & Karamanos, N. K. The extracellular
matrix as a multitasking player in disease.FEBS J. 286,
2830–2869 (2019).
11. Karakioulaki, M., Papakonstantinou, E. & Stolz, D. Extracellular
matrix remodelling in COPD.Eur. Respir. Rev. 29, 190124 (2020).
12. Liu, L., Stephens, B., Bergman, M., May, A. & Chiang, T. Role of
collagen in airway mechanics.Bioeng. (Basel) 8, 13 (2021).
1 3 . T a n ,Q . ,C h o i ,K .M . ,S i c a r d ,D .&T s c h u m p e r l i n ,D .J .H u m a na i r w a y
organoid engineering as a step toward lung regeneration and dis-
ease modeling. Biomaterials113,1 1 8–132 (2017).
1 4 . H u i ,K .P .Y .e ta l .T r o p i s m ,r eplication competence, and innate
immune responses of inﬂuenza virus: an analysis of human airway
organoids and ex-vivo bronchus cultures.Lancet Respir. Med.
6,
846–854 (2018).
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-44488-1
Nature Communications|          (2024) 15:143 14

<<<PAGE 15>>>
1 5 . C o n w a y ,R .F . ,F r u m ,T . ,C o n c h o l a ,A .S .&S p e n c e ,J .R .U n d e r -
standing human lung development through in vitro model systems.
Bioessays 42, e2000006 (2020).
16. Rabata, A., Fedr, R., Soucek, K., Hampl, A. & Koledova, Z. 3D cell
culture models demonstrate a role for FGF and WNT signaling in
regulation of lung epithelialcell fate and morphogenesis.Front Cell
Dev. Biol. 8, 574 (2020).
17. Barkauskas, C. E., Chung, M. I., Fioret, B., Gao, X., Katsura, H. &
Hogan, B. L. Lung organoids: current uses and future promise.
Development144,9 8 6–997 (2017).
1 8 . A i s e n b r e y ,E .A .&M u r p h y ,W .L .S y n t h e t i ca l t e r n a t i v e st oM a t r i g e l .
Nat. Rev. Mater. 5,5 3 9–551 (2020).
19. Zhou, J. et al. Differentiated human airway organoids to assess
infectivity of emerging inﬂuenza virus.Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA115,
6822–6827 (2018).
20. Stroulios, G. et al. Apical-out airway organoids as a platform for
studying viral infections and screening for antiviral drugs.Sci. Rep.
12, 7673 (2022).
21. Wijesekara, P. et al. Engineering rotating apical-out airway organoid
for assessing respiratory cilia motility.iScience 25, 104730 (2022).
22. Liu, C., Lewin Mejia, D., Chiang, B., Luker, K. E. & Luker, G. D. Hybrid
collagen alginate hydrogel as a platform for 3D tumor spheroid
invasion. Acta Biomater. 75,2 1 3–225 (2018).
2 3 . L i u ,C . ,C h i a n g ,B . ,L e w i nM e j i a ,D . ,L u k e r ,K .E . ,L u k e r ,G .D .&L e e ,A .
Mammary ﬁbroblasts remodelﬁbrillar collagen microstructure in a
biomimetic nanocomposite hydrogel.Acta Biomater. 83,
221–232 (2019).
24. Yu, X. M. et al. Reduced growth and proliferation dynamics of nasal
epithelial stem/progenitor cells in nasal polyps in vitro.Sci. Rep. 4,
4619 (2014).
2 5 . R a o ,W . ,N i r o u l a ,S . ,W a n g ,S . ,V i n c e n t ,M . ,M c K e o n ,F .&X i a n ,W .
Protocol for cloning epithelial stem cell variants from human lung.
STAR Protoc. 1, 100063 (2020).
26. Rao, W. et al. Regenerative metaplastic clones in COPD lung drive
inﬂammation and ﬁbrosis. Cell 181,8 4 8–864 (2020).
27. Liu, L., Stephens, B., Bergman, M., May, A. & Chiang, T. Role of
collagen in airway mechanics.Bioengineering (Basel)8,1 2( 2 0 2 1 ) .
28. Chiu, M. C. L. C., Liu, X., Song, W., Wan, Z., Yu, Y., Huang, J., Xiao, D.,
Chu, H., Cai, J. P., To, K. K., Yuen, K. Y. & Zhou, J. Human nasal
organoids model SARS-CoV-2 upper respiratory infection and
recapitulate the differential infectivity of emerging variants.mBio
13, e0194422 (2022).
29. Bennink, L. L. et al. Visualizing collagen proteolysis by peptide
hybridization: from 3D cell culture to in vivo imaging.Biomaterials
183
,6 7–76 (2018).
30. Espindola, M. S. et al. Differential responses to targeting matrix
metalloproteinase 9 in idiopathic pulmonaryﬁbrosis. A m .J .R e s p i r .
Crit. Care Med. 203,4 5 8–470 (2021).
31. Co, J. Y., Margalef-Català, M., Li, X., Mah, A. T., Kuo, C. J., Monack, D.
M. & Amieva, M. R. Controlling epithelial polarity: a human enteroid
model for host-pathogen interactions.Cell Rep. 26,
2509–2520 (2019).
32. Pedersen, P. S. F. O., Holstei n-Rathlou, N. H., Larsen, P. L. &
Qvortrup, K. Ion transport in epithelial spheroids derived from
human airway cells. Am. J. Physiol. 276,L 7 5–L80 (1999).
33. Boecking, C. A. et al. A simple method to generate human airway
epithelial organoids with externally orientated apical membranes.
Am. J. Physiol. Lung Cell Mol. Physiol. 322,L 4 2 0–L437 (2022).
34. Zhu, L., Lee, P. K., Lee, W. M., Zhao, Y., Yu, D. & Chen, Y. Rhinovirus-
induced major airway mucin production involves a novel TLR3-
EGFR-dependent pathway.Am. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol. 40,
510–519 (2009).
35. Liu, T. et al. NOD-like receptor family, pyrin domain containing 3
(NLRP3) contributes to inﬂammation, pyroptosis, and mucin
production in human airway epithelium on rhinovirus infection.J.
Allergy Clin. Immunol.144,7 7 7–787 (2019).
36. Palmer, M. A. Fusion of airway s during avian lung development
constitutes a novel mechanism for the formation of continuous
lumena in multicellular epithelia.Dev. Dyn. 249,1 3 1 8–1333 (2020).
37. Cote, L. E. Won ’t you be my neighbor: how epithelial cells connect
together to build global tissue polarity.Front Cell Dev. Biol. 10,
887107 (2022).
38. Ordovas-Montanes, J. et al. Allergic in ﬂammatory memory in
human respiratory epithelial progenitor cells.Nature 560,
649–654 (2018).
39. Li, L. Y. et al. Downregulation of MCM2 contributes to the reduced
growth potential of epithelial progenitor cells in chronic nasal
inﬂammation. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 147,1 9 6 6–1973 (2021).
40. Antoine, E. E., Vlachos, P. P. & Rylander, M. N. Review of collagen I
hydrogels for bioengineered tissue microenvironments: char-
acterization of mechanics, structure, and transport.Tissue Eng. B
Rev. 20,6 8 3–696 (2014).
4 1 . W a l t e r s ,B .D .&S t e g e m a n n ,J .P .S t r a t e g i e sf o rd i r e c t i n gt h e
structure and function of three-dimensional collagen biomaterials
across length scales.Acta Biomater. 10,1 4 8 8–1501 (2014).
42. Caliari, S. R. & Burdick, J. A. A practical guide to hydrogels for cell
culture. Nat. Methods 13,4 0 5–414 (2016).
43. Löffek, S., Schilling, O. & Franzke, C. W. Series “matrix metallo-
proteinases in lung health and disease”:B i o l o g i c a lr o l eo fm a t r i x
metalloproteinases: a critical balance.Eur. Respir. J. 38,
191–208 (2011).
4 4 . G a f f n e y ,J . ,S o l o m o n o v ,I . ,Z e h o r a i ,E .&S a g i ,I .M u l t i l e v e lr e g u l a t i o n
of matrix metalloproteinases in tissue homeostasis indicates their
molecular speciﬁcity in vivo. Matrix Biol. 44-46,1 9 1–199 (2015).
45. Churg, A., Zhou, S. & Wright, J. L. Series “matrix metalloproteinases
in lung health and disease”: matrix metalloproteinases in COPD.
Eur. Respir. J. 39,1 9 7–209 (2012).
46. Page, K., Ledford, J. R., Zhou, P. & Wills-Karp, M. A TLR2 agonist in
German cockroach frass activates MMP-9 release and is protective
against allergic inﬂammation in mice. J. Immunol. 183,
3400–3408 (2009).
47. O ’Kane, C. M. et al. STAT3, p38 MAPK, and NF-kappaB drive unop-
posed monocyte-dependentﬁbroblast MMP-1 secretion in tuber-
culosis. Am. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol. 43, 465–474 (2010).
48. Todorova, L., Bjermer, L., Miller-Larsson, A. & Westergren-Thorsson,
G. Relationship between matrix production by bronchialﬁbroblasts
and lung function and AHR in asthma. Respir. Med. 104,
1799–1808 (2010).
49. Craig, V. J., Zhang, L., Hagood, J. S. & Owen, C. A. Matrix metallo-
proteinases as therapeutic targets for idiopathic pulmonaryﬁbrosis.
Am. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol. 53,5 8 5–600 (2015).
50. Xuan, L. et al. Ceramide induces MMP-9 expression through JAK2/
STAT3 pathway in airway epithelium.
Lipids Health Dis. 19,
196 (2020).
51. Karaguzel, D., Sarac, B. E., Akel Bilgic, H., Summak, G. Y., Unal, M. A.,
Kalayci, O. & Karaaslan, C. House dust mite-derived allergens effect
on matrix metalloproteases in airway epithelial cells.Exp. Lung Res.
47,4 3 6–450 (2021).
5 2 . R e n ,B . ,W u ,Q . ,M u s k h e l i s h v i l i ,L . ,D a v i s ,K . ,W a n g ,Y . ,R u a ,D .&C a o ,
X. Evaluating the sub-acute toxicity of formaldehyde fumes in an
in vitro human airway epithelial tissue model.I n tJ .M o l .S c i .23,
2593 (2022).
53. Hong, Y. et al. Malfunction of airway basal stem cells plays a crucial
role in pathophysiology of tracheobronchopathia osteoplastica.
Nat. Commun. 13, 1309 (2022).
54. Sisson, J. H., Stoner, J. A., Ammons, B. A. & Wyatt, T. A. All-digital
image capture and whole-ﬁeld analysis of ciliary beat frequency.J.
Microsc 211,1 0 3–111 (2003).
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-44488-1
Nature Communications|          (2024) 15:143 15

<<<PAGE 16>>>
55. Bray, N. L., Pimentel, H., Melsted, P. & Pachter, L. Near-optimal
probabilistic RNA-seq quantiﬁcation. Nat. Biotechnol.34,
525–527 (2016).
5 6 . Y u ,G . ,W a n g ,L .G . ,H a n ,Y .&H e ,Q .Y .c l u s t e r P r oﬁler: an R package
for comparing biological themes among gene clusters. OMICS 16,
284–287 (2012).
5 7 . S i n a ,A . ,L o r d - D u f o u r ,S .&A n n a b i ,B .C e l l - b a s e de v i d e n c ef o ra m i -
nopeptidase N/CD13 inhibitor actinonin targeting of MT1-MMP-
mediated proMMP-2 activation.Cancer Lett. 279,1 7 1–176 (2009).
5 8 . I m ,N .R . ,L e e ,D .Y . ,K i m ,B . ,K i m ,J . ,J u n g ,K .Y . ,K i m ,T .H .&B a e k ,S .K .
Role of matrix metalloproteinases 7 in the pathogenesis of lar-
yngopharyngeal reﬂux: decreased E-cadherin in acid exposed pri-
mary human pharyngeal epithelial cells.Int J. Mol. Sci. 20,
5276 (2019).
59. Lisse, T. S. et al. Paclitaxel-induced epithelial damage and ectopic
MMP-13 expression promotes neurotoxicity in zebraﬁsh. Proc. Natl
A c a d .S c i .U S A113,E 2 1 8 9–E2198 (2016).
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Prof. Marius Sudol for editing the manuscript; and
thank Prof. Yang Li from the Fifth Afﬁliated Hospital of Sun Yat Sen
University for providing the collagen hybridizing peptide 5-FAM con-
jugate (F-CHP). This study was supported by grants from the National
Natural Science Foundation of China 81974139, 82171112 and 81770983
to C.Li, 32101062 to C.Liu, 82201261 to L.Li, and 81974141 to J.Li; Open
Project of State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease SKLRD-OP-
202008 to R.Chen and C.Li; Guangzhou Science and Technology Pro-
gram 201907010038 to C.Li; and Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic
Research Foundation 2022A1515012607 to C.Liu.
Author contributions
L.L.: conceptualization, experimental operation, investigation, formal
analysis, data curation, writing– original draft; L.J.: experimental
operation, investigation, formalanalysis, data curation, writing– original
draft; D.F.: RNAseq data analysis, methodology, formal analysis, data
curation; Y.Y.: image creation, RNAseq data analysis, data curation;
X.Yang: image creation and analysis, data curation; J.L.: patient recruit-
ment, project administration, funding acquisition; D.J.: experimental
operation, image creation, formal analysis; H.C.: patient recruitment,
sample collection and procession, project administration; Q.M.: sample
collection and procession, project administration; R.C.: sample collec-
tion, fund acquisition; B.F.: experimental operation, methodology; X.Z.:
project design, methodology; Z.L.: project design, RNAseq data analysis;
X . Y e :e x p e r i m e n t a lo p e r a t i o n ;Y . H . :p r o j e c td e s i g n ;C . L i u :p r o j e c t
administration, project design,funding acquisition, writing– review &
editing, supervision, project administration. C.Li: project administration,
project design, funding acquisition, writing– original draft, writing–
review & editing, supervision, project administration.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary informationThe online version contains
supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-44488-1.
Correspondenceand requests for materials should be addressed to
Chun Liu or Chunwei Li.
Peer review informationNature Communicationsthanks Jelte van der
Vaart and the other, anonymous, reviewers for their contribution to the
peer review of this work. A peer review ﬁle is available.
Reprints and permissions informationis available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jur-
isdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder. To view a copy of this licence, visithttp://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2024
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-44488-1
Nature Communications|          (2024) 15:143 16