

<<<PAGE 1>>>
Human airway organoid engineering as a step toward lung
regeneration and disease modeling
Qi Tan, Kyoung Moo Choi, Delphine Sicard, Daniel J. Tschumperlin *
Department of Physiology and Biomedical Engineering, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA
article info
Article history:
Received 2 September 2016
Received in revised form
14 October 2016
Accepted 27 October 2016
Available online 28 October 2016
Keywords:
3D culture
Self-organization
de novo lung regeneration
YAP
Organoid implantation
Pulmonary ﬁbrosis modeling
abstract
Organoids represent both a potentially powerful tool for the study cell-cell interactions within tissue-like
environments, and a platform for tissue regenerative approaches. The development of lung tissue-like
organoids from human adult-derived cells has not previously been reported. Here we combined hu-
man adult primary bronchial epithelial cells, lung ﬁbroblasts, and lung microvascular endothelial cells in
supportive 3D culture conditions to generate airway organoids. We demonstrate that randomly-seeded
mixed cell populations undergo rapid condensation and self-organization into discrete epithelial and
endothelial structures that are mechanically robust and stable during long term culture. After conden-
sation airway organoids generate invasive multicellular tubular structures that recapitulate limited as-
pects of branching morphogenesis, and require actomyosin-mediated force generation and YAP/TAZ
activation. Despite the proximal source of primary epithelium used in the airway organoids, discrete
areas of both proximal and distal epithelial markers were observed over time in culture, demonstrating
remarkable epithelial plasticity within the context of organoid cultures. Airway organoids also exhibited
complex multicellular responses to a prototypical ﬁbrogenic stimulus (TGF-
b1) in culture, and limited
capacity to undergo continued maturation and engraftment after ectopic implantation under the murine
kidney capsule. These results demonstrate that the airway organoid system developed here represents a
novel tool for the study of disease-relevant cell-cell interactions, and establishes this platform as a ﬁrst
step toward cell-based therapy for chronic lung diseases based on de novo engineering of implantable
airway tissues.
© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.1. Introduction
Respiratory diseases such as chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease and pulmonary ﬁbrosis represent a large and growing
public health burden [1,2], are associated with substantial
morbidity and mortality, and currently lack curative therapies. At
their end-stage, such diseases require lung transplantation for
therapy, but the supply of donor organs is extremely limited, and
lung transplant outcomes remain suboptimal [3]. Regenerative
approaches offer potential long-term hope for addressing both the
epidemic of chronic lung diseases, and the shortage of donor or-
gans, but critical hurdles remain to be overcome [4]. While recent
studies have made great progress delineating the mechanisms of
lung development and developing methods to drive iPS cells to-
ward mature lung lineages [5e7], relatively less progress has been
made in designing strategies by which these advances might be
translated into tissue repair, and ultimately advanced toward hu-
man studies. Current approaches to engraft dissociated cells in the
lung show promise, but have thus far been limited to the setting of
severe infections [8] or radiation-induced preconditioning [9].A
major alternative emphasis has been on the generation of decel-
lularized and recellularized lung scaffolds as an engineered organ
replacement [10e13]. Relatively less attention has been devoted to
the de novo generation of complex three-dimensional lung-like
tissues in culture suitable for eventual translational applications. A
potential additional bene ﬁt from developing such complex engi-
neered lung tissues is for disease modeling. Chronic lung diseases
are distinguished by speci ﬁc tissue remodeling processes and
complex cell-cell interactions that are not easily recapitulated in
typical cell culture systems. Therefore, we sought to develop an
airway organoid culture system combining multiple lung cell types
as both a step toward eventual regenerative approaches, and as a
system to study disease-relevant cell-cell interactions and complex
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: tschumperlin.daniel@mayo.edu (D.J. Tschumperlin).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Biomaterials
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/biomaterials
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2016.10.046
0142-9612/© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Biomaterials 1 13 (2017) 1 18e132

<<<PAGE 2>>>
tissue remodeling processes.
To generate highly organized 3D tissues that mimic organ
structure and function, tissue engineers have attempted to reca-
pitulate the in vivo organogenesis process by manipulating critical
aspects of the cell culture environment. During embryonic devel-
opment, the lungs and other internal organs ﬁrst emerge as organ
buds composed of epithelial and mesenchymal progenitors.
Through repeated rounds of outgrowth and branching primitive
organ buds grow into mature organs [14]. The reciprocal epithelial-
mesenchymal interactions critical to organogenesis during em-
bryonic development can be recapitulated in three dimensional co-
culture systems to guide formation of similar tissue-like structures
in vitro [15]. Recently, complex structures termed organoids [16]
have been generated for brain [1 7], liver [18], pancreas, and lung
[19] using combinations of induced pluripotent stem cells, induc-
tive soluble factors, and supportive three dimensional culture
conditions. Alternatively, resident progenitor cells from adult tis-
sues can be cultured in supportive 3D systems, and can also
generate organoids. Typical examples include LGR5 þ cells from
intestine and liver [20], and in the ﬁeld of lung biology, the gen-
eration of tracheospheres [21] and alveospheres [22,23] from
airway and alveolar epithelial progenitors. While organoids have
shown promise in transplantation models in the colon [24] and
liver [25], similar advances have not been reported using adult-
derived lung progenitors. Similarly, although organoids have po-
tential for disease modeling and drug screening, tractable human
lung cell-based organoid systems have not been reported.
Here we combined adult human primary bronchial epithelial
cells, lung ﬁbroblasts, and lung microvascular endothelial cells in
3D culture conditions to generate airway organoids. By combining
epithelial differentiation conditions with a multicellular aggrega-
tion culture system, we generated self-assembling bioengineered
airway organoids that are amenable to ectopic transplantation and
study of cell-cell interactions crucial to tissue biology. This system
represents a novel tool for studying disease-relevant cellular and
molecular function, and an important step toward cell-based
therapy for chronic lung diseases based on de novo engineered
airway tissues.
2. Material and methods
2.1. 2D cell culture and labeling
Human bronchial epithelial cells (NHBE, 8 cell lines used) were
purchased from Lonza and cultured in bronchial epithelial growth
medium (BEGM, Lonza) with 1% Antibiotic-Antimycotic. Human
microvascular lung endothelial cells (HMVEC-L, 3 cell lines used)
were also purchased from Lonza and cultured in Endothelial Cell
Growth Medium (EBM-2MV, Lonza) with 1% Antibiotic-
Antimycotic. Human lung ﬁbroblasts (generously provided by
Carol Feghali-Bostwick) previously isolated by explant culture from
donor lungs rejected for transplantation under a protocol approved
by the University of Pittsburgh Institutional Review Board, were
culture in DMEM with 10% FBS, 1% Antibiotic-Antimycotic. The cells
were regularly maintained in humidi ﬁed 5% CO2 at 37
/C14 C. For cell
labeling, cells were incubated with pre-warmed CellTracker ™
Working Solution (1 mM from 1000X DMSO dissolved stock solu-
tion) for 30 min.
2.2. 3D cell culture and generation of human airway organoids
Culture plates were coated with 40% Matrigel (Corning) com-
bined with PneumaCult-ALI Maintenance Medium (Stemcell
Technologies). The former is an extracellular matrix preparation
derived from a gelatinous protein mixture secreted by Engelbreth-
Holm-Swarm (EHS) mouse sarcoma cells, composed of approxi-
mately 60% laminin, 30% collagen IV, and 8% entactin. Entactin is a
bridging molecule that interacts with laminin and collagen IV, and
contributes to structural organization. Although Matrigel has
inherent long term limitations for clinical use, it is a valuable proof
of concept matrix system for supporting organoid morphogenesis
[26]. PneumaCult-ALI is a media formulation optimized to induce
primary human bronchial epithelial cell mucociliary differentiation
under air-liquid interface (ALI) culture conditions. After 45 min
incubation at 37 /C14 C for gelation of the thick Matrigel layer, a single
cell suspension including NHBE, HMVEC-L and HLF cells was
combined with 5% Matrigel and PneumaCult- ALI Maintenance
Medium, and was seeded on top of the Matrigel layer. The ratio of
each type of cell was human NHBE:HMVEC-L:HLF ¼ 10:7:2
following a previously described approach for generation of liver
organoids [18]. The cells were fed with 5% Matrigel in PneumaCult-
ALI Maintenance Medium every other day and observed by light
microscopy. Cells labeled with Fluorescent CellTracker ™ were
observed in a Cytation 5 Cell Imaging Multi-Mode Reader for 24 h
time-lapse ﬂuorescence microscopy to visualize organoid
compaction and formation.
2.3. Organoid actomyosin and YAP analysis
Day 2 organoids were used for treatment. ON-TARGETplus Hu-
man YAP1 (10413) siRNA SMARTpool (30 pmol, Dharmacon) in
Opti-Mem medium (Life Technologies) was transfected using Lip-
ofectamine RNAi Max (Life Technologies) followed by incubation
for 24 h at 37 /C14 C, with media than changed to the normal differ-
entiation medium for another 48 h. Non-muscle myosin inhibitor
blebbistatin (10 mmol, Sigma, B0560), F-actin inhibitor cytochalasin
D( 1 0 mmol, Sigma, C8273) and Rho kinase inhibitor Y-27632
(100 mmol, Stemcell Technologies, 72304) were used to treat day 2
organoids for 72 h. Photos were taking by Nikon TMS Microscope or
Cytation 5 Cell Imaging system. Buds or invasive tubular structures
were counted manually and average diameters of organoids were
counted in 3 organoids per group using ImageJ.
2.4. Atomic force microscopy
Organoids were embedded in O.C.T (Optimal Cutting Tempera-
ture, n/C14 4583) and stored at /C0 80 /C14 C. 10 mm thickness organoid slices
were cut by cryosection (Leica) at /C0 21 /C14 C and mounted on poly- L-
lysine coated glass slides. To avoid drying, tissue slices were
maintained in PBS. Measurements were performed using a Bio-
Scope Catalyst AFM (Bruker) mounted on an inverted microscope
equipped with epi ﬂuorescence (Olympus) using a spherical tip
(Novascan) with a radius of 2.5 mm and a spring constant of ~98 pN/
nm. Force curves were acquired with MIRO 2.0 (NanoScope 9.1,
Bruker) at room temperature in PBS. The indentation was estimated
at ~250 nm for an applied force of ~24 nN. The preparation of
organoid slice sample and the AFM measurements were performed
on the same day. Force curves were analyzed by NanoScope Anal-
ysis (Bruker). The extend curve was ﬁtted to determine the Young's
modulus using the Hertz model assuming Poisson's ratio of 0.4 [27].
2.5. Gene expression analysis (RNA isolation, cDNA synthesis, RT-
PCR)
Total RNA was isolated with RNeasy Plus Mini kit and cDNA was
synthesized with SuperScript ™ IV Reverse Transcriptase. Gene
expression levels were quantiﬁed by qRT-PCR on the Lightcycler 96
Real-Time PCR System (Roche) according to the manufacturer's
instruction. qRT-PCR was performed by incubating at 95 /C14 C for
10 min and then cycling 40 times at 95 /C14 C for 10 s, 60 /C14 C for 10s,
Q. Tan et al. / Biomaterials 1 13 (2017) 1 18 e132 119

<<<PAGE 3>>>
72 /C14 C for 10s. Ct values within each experiment were normalized
against GAPDH. Primers are listed in Supplemental Table 1.
2.6. ELISA for MUC5AC
Total protein was collected from organoids and Human MUC5AC
ELISA Quantitation Kit (LifeSpan BioSciences) was used to assess
protein expression of MUC5AC according to the manufacturer's
instructions. One measurement was made per single organoid.
2.7. Tissue processing, histological tissue assessment,
immunostaining and confocal microscopy
Organoids were collected and embedding in O.C.T. 10 mm cry-
osections were placed on Poly- L-Lysine Coated Slides (Fisher Sci-
entiﬁc) for immunostaining or standard histological staining with
the BBC Histo $Perfect H &E Staining kit. For immunostaining, tis-
sues were ﬁxed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 20 min and per-
meabilized using 0.25% Triton X-100 for 15 min. Antigen retrieval
was applied with PH ¼ 6.0 citrate buffer when necessary. Organoids
were treated with 5% goat serum in 1% BSA/PBS (block solution) for
1 h. Following two additional PBS washes, samples were incubated
overnight with primary antibodies at 4
/C14 C. Specimens were washed
twice in PBS and incubated with the corresponding secondary an-
tibodies at 1:500 dilution for 1 h (Alexa Fluor488, 546, 555; Invi-
trogen). Samples were mounted with mounting media containing
nuclear counterstain DAPI (Vector Lab). Images were acquired using
the LSM780 inverted laser scanning confocal microscope (Carl
Zeiss). Images were processed using ZEN microscope and imaging
software, Photoshop or ImageJ. Cell quanti ﬁcation of immune-
positive cells and DAPI was performed using the Cytation 5 Cell
Imaging Reader software GEN 2.09 or ImageJ using the cell counter
plugin. Antibodies are listed in Supplemental Table 2 .
2.8. Statistical analysis
Data are presented as mean ± SEM. Statistical analyses were
performed using GraphPad Prism 5 (GraphPad Software). The sig-
niﬁcance of the differences between two mean values was deter-
mined using an unpaired t-test. P values less than 0.05 were
accepted as signi ﬁcant.
3. Results
3.1. Development of an airway organoid from adult lung cells
To develop airway organoids from adult lung cells we combined
methods optimized for growth and differentiation of human airway
epithelial cells [21] with mesenchymal cell-guided condensation on
a supportive Matrigel layer [28]. Speci ﬁcally, we combined adult
primary human bronchial epithelial cells (NHBE) at a ratio of 10:7:2
with adult primary human microvascular lung endothelial cells
(HMVEC-L) and adult primary human lung ﬁbroblasts (HLF) atop a
3D Matrigel-coating in each well of a 96 well culture plate ( Fig. 1A).
The cells rapidly condensed atop the Matrigel layer and formed 3D
cell aggregates within approximately 24 h, continuing to condense
up to 72 h. When seeding fewer than 1 /C2 10
5 epithelial cells per
well, multiple spheroids formed in each well, sometimes with large
variance in organoid size, and with increasing organoid numbers
and smaller organoids observed as the epithelial cell density was
decreased ( Fig. 1 B and S1). For seeding densities of 1 /C2 105
epithelial cells and higher, a single organoid formed in each well,
with consistent formation noted across multiple NHBE donor lines
(Fig. S1 ). In order to minimize variation in organoid formation
associated with low seeding density, and potential complications
introduced by diffusion limitations associated with high seeding
densities and larger organoids, we chose to focus all subsequent
studies on organoids formed from 1 /C2 105 adult primary human
bronchial epithelial cells (total cell number of ~1.9 /C2 105 cells/well).
At this seeding density, multicellular aggregates remained stable in
overall size after 3 days, with diameters in the range of
~1000e2000 mm( Fig. 1C). To identify the critical cell types for this
dynamic and directed condensation process, we examined single
cell type behaviors and various combinations of the three cell lin-
eages (Fig. 1DeF). Omitting ﬁbroblasts from the co-culture led to a
failure in cell aggregate condensation, though smaller spherical
colonies did ultimately appear ( Fig. 1 D), recapitulating previous
descriptions of tracheosphere formation [21]. In contrast, omission
of endothelial cells did not prevent organoid formation in the 3D
culture system. Fibroblasts alone ( Fig. 1 E) or in combination
(Fig. 1 F) with either or both other cell types were suf ﬁcient for
aggregation, con ﬁrming that the presence of ﬁbroblasts is critical
for the self-condensation process. These observations are consis-
tent with previous reports that ﬁbroblast-dependent paracrine
support through the activation of FGF and BMP pathways and
ﬁbroblast-dependent cytoskeletal contractions are essential for cell
aggregate condensation [28].
Because of our ultimate interest in regenerative and disease-
modeling applications, we continued to focus on three cell co-
cultures that include epithelial, endothelial and mesenchymal
resident populations of the mature lung in all subsequent work. We
termed our organ bud-like 3D structures “airway organoids ”
because the epithelial cell type used originated in human bronchial
airways. Comparison of epithelial markers expressed in primary
NHBE cells in monolayer culture con ﬁrmed the dominant proximal
basal phenotype (P63þ) of this starting cell population ( Fig. 1G and
Fig. S2 ). As a preliminary evaluation of the self-organizing capa-
bility and mechanical stability of airway organoids, we labeled the
cells individually with different CellTracker ™ probes in 2D culture
conditions before seeding them randomly on Matrigel-coated
plates for organoid culture. Fluorescence time-lapse images were
then obtained, allowing us to visualize self-organization of endo-
thelial cell (Cyan) and ﬁbroblast (Green) clusters among compara-
tively homogenously distributed NHBE cells (Red) ( Fig. 1A). Using
the approach detailed above, successful organoids formed (diam-
eter larger than 500 mm) at a rate of ~80% (64/80), and airway
organoids were manipulable with spatulas or forceps, suggestion
potential for surgical handling and implantation. Atomic force mi-
croscopy (AFM) micro-indentation was performed to evaluate the
local elastic modulus within airway organoids (expressed as
Young's modulus) guided by light and ﬂuorescence microscopy
(Fig. 1H). The relatively high modulus observed within the aggre-
gates was consistent with our manual manipulation observations,
and suggested that nascent airway organoids form physically
robust aggregates through a mechanically dynamic process that
includes considerable mechanical heterogeneity during the process
of condensation and self-organization ( Fig. 1I).
3.2. Epithelial, mesenchymal, and endothelial cells re-organize
within the airway organoid
To further study the self-organization of lung epithelium,
endothelium and mesenchyme within airway organoids, we per-
formed immunostaining and confocal microscopy at various time
points after cell seeding. At early time points, we found that airway
organoids possessed broadly distributed mesenchymal cells, iden-
tiﬁed by vimentin immunostaining, and clusters of epithelial cells
positive for E-Cadherin (CDH1), airway epithelial basal marker P63
[5], and luminal marker KRT8 [21] (day 7, Fig. 2 A, B, L). Epithelial
cell clusters self-assembled into tubular structures of varying shape
Q. Tan et al. / Biomaterials 1 13 (2017) 1 18 e132120

<<<PAGE 4>>>
and size. The expression of basal airway stem cell [5] transcripts
(P63þ, KRT5þ, KRT14þ) diminished in 3D airway organoid culture
compared with 2D cultures of NHBE cells (Fig. 2C), consistent with a
transition away from the predominant basal stem cell phenotype
expressed by these primary cells in 2D culture. A gradual basal to
luminal shift in epithelial phenotype was con ﬁrmed by the
increased observation of the luminal airway epithelial marker
(KRT8þ) in the airway organoids ( Fig. 2 C).
Similar to the observed epithelial self-organization,
CD31þ endothelial cells were also visualized to form cell clusters
along with tube like-structures in airway organoids ( Fig. 2D and E).
These endothelial structures were closely associated with ﬁbro-
blasts, but not epithelial cells. CD31 þ endothelial cells decreased
dramatically in abundance over time ( Fig. 2 D and E) and after 14
days CD31þ cells were rarely observed. This ﬁnding was con ﬁrmed
by the gradual loss of CD31 transcripts over time in airway organoid
co-cultures ( Fig. 2 F). Such a ﬁnding was not surprising given our
use of culture media optimized for NHBE cells. These ﬁndings thus
demonstrate the capacity of human microvascular endothelial cells
to self-organize in airway organoid culture, but clearly indicate the
need to optimize long term culture to promote endothelial 3D
stabilization and maturation of vascular structures.
Proliferations in the airway organoids, assessed and quanti ﬁed
by Ki67 expression, was most abundant at the earliest time point
analyzed (day 3, Fig. 2 H) and decreased over time ( Fig. 2 HeK, N),
consistent with the relative stability in airway organoid size over
time. The vast majority of Ki67 expression was not in cells
expressing epithelial lineage markers (CDH1 þ), but rather in cells
expressing the mesenchymal lineage (VIM þ, CD31 /C0 ), suggesting
that only limited epithelial proliferation and modest ﬁbroblast
proliferation was present during long-term culture of airway
organoids. The apparent low cell turn over in airway organoids
mimics adult lung and airway homeostasis [29], but also suggests
that more proliferative progenitor populations, or more stimulative
culture conditions, may be required to enhance organoid growth.
Taken together the results documented in Fig. 2 demonstrate that
Fig. 1. Airway organoid formation from adult human lung cells. Schematic overview of methods for forming and growing airway organoids in vitro and transplan ting into NSG mice
in vivo (A). Early formation of a cell aggregate visualized at day 3 by confocal imaging using Cell Tracker labeled cells (Green ¼ HLF, Red ¼ NHBE, Cyan ¼ HMVEC-L) is shown in the
inset. Correlation between the number of NHBE cells input and organoid sizes (B). Light microscopy images show the self-condensation of mixed NHBE, H MVEC-L and HLF cells and
formation of airway organoids over time (C) NHBE cells alone form small spheres in 3D culture at 21days (D). HLFs only in 3D culture at 21 days (E). Mixed N HBE and HLF 3D culture
at 21 days (F). Epithelial lineage marker quanti ﬁcation for NHBE cells (mean ± SEM from 4 individuals) in monolayer culture demonstrate a dominant basal cell (P63 þ) phenotype
prior to organoid culture (G). The highly heterogeneous mechanical properties of airway organoids (day 7) were measured by AFM (I) and correlated wit h light microscopy and
ﬂuorescence images (Green ¼ HLF, H). Values in graph represent mean ± SEM; n ¼ 4 (B, G). Scale bars, 200 mm( C eF).
Q. Tan et al. / Biomaterials 1 13 (2017) 1 18 e132 121

<<<PAGE 5>>>
the airway organoids formed from adult human bronchial epithe-
lial, ﬁbroblast and endothelial cell populations undergo rapid self-
organization over time into highly dense epithelial-lined structures
surrounded by mesenchyme, with a gradual loss of vascular
endothelium.
3.3. Proximal airway epithelial differentiation in airway organoids
NHBE cells cultured under de ﬁned conditions at air-liquid
interface are capable of undergoing maturation and differentia-
tion to a pseudo-stratiﬁed, mucociliary epithelium [30]. To evaluate
Fig. 2. Self-organization of cells within airway organoids. P63 (red, A), KRT8 (red, B) and E-cadherin (CDH1, red, L and green, H, I, J, K) positive epithelial cells clustered together and
were also visualized in close contact with vimentin positive mesenchymal cells in airway organoids at day 7 (A, B, L). CD31 positive cells also cluster ed together with close in-
teractions with vimentin positive (green) cells in the airway at day 7 (D) and day 14 (E). Relative gene expression of P63, KRT5, KRT14, KRT8, vimentin, CD31 and CDH1 in the airway
organoids at different time points was compared to NHBE (C, M), HMVEC-L (F) or HLF (G) cells in traditional 2D mono-cultures. Proliferation was assess ed by ki67 (red) in the airway
organoids at various time points (H, I, J, K) and quanti ﬁed (N). Values in graphs represent mean ± SEM; n ¼ 3, *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; t-test. Scale bars, 100 mm( A eJ), 50 mm (K).
Q. Tan et al. / Biomaterials 1 13 (2017) 1 18 e132122

<<<PAGE 6>>>
the capacity of NHBE cells to undergo such differentiation in 3D
airway organoid culture, we analyzed epithelial protein and tran-
script markers by immunostaining and quantitative PCR respec-
tively. Airway organoids demonstrated gradual increases in
expression of the key secretory product of airway club cells, the
protein uteroglobin [31], denoted SCGB1A1 or Club Cell-Speci ﬁc1 0
kD Protein (CC10, Fig. 3 AeC). Club cells are responsible for detox-
ifying harmful substances inhaled into the lungs, including
engulfment of airborne toxins and breakdown via their cytochrome
P-450 enzymes [32]. Consistent with this function, we found that
mRNA expression of cytochrome P-450 enzymes increased signif-
icantly in the 3D culture ( Fig. 3 D). Secretory club cells are mitoti-
cally active and also act as progenitors for epithelial repair, as they
are able to differentiate into ciliated cells or non-ciliated cells to
regenerate the bronchiolar epithelium [31]. CC10 protein
(Fig. 3 AeC) and transcript levels ( Fig. 3 D) increased dramatically
over time in the airway organoid 3D culture compared with NHBE
2D culture ( Fig. 3 D).
Goblet cells are specialized secretory cells found in the respi-
ratory epithelium of the trachea, bronchi, and larger bronchioles,
and are responsible for mucus secretion and maintenance [33].
Goblet cells are denoted by secretory vesicles containing the highly
charged glycoprotein MUC5AC. We observed increasing organiza-
tion of MUC5AC þ immunostaining inside apparent lumens within
airway organoids over time ( Fig. 3 AeC), consistent with epithelial
organization and goblet cell differentiation. Transcript levels for
MUC5AC were also signi ﬁcantly increased in prolonged airway
organoid culture, consistent with epithelial secretory differentia-
tion over time in airway organoids ( Fig. 3 D). Moreover, robust
MUC5AC protein expression was detected by ELISA, peaking at day
7 but maintained out to day 21 in airway organoids ( Fig. 3 E).
In contrast to abundant signs of secretory differentiation,
comparatively few cells expressed the ciliated cell marker [34]
FOXJ1 (Fig. 3 F and G), suggesting that the 3D culture environment
employed here does not adequately promote terminal differentia-
tion of all airway epithelial cell types. Recent work has highlighted
a prominent role for Notch signaling in controlling airway epithelial
differentiation [35]. Notch signaling inhibition with DAPT treat-
ment increased the mRNA expression level of FOXJ1 (Fig. 3J) as well
as FOXJ1 immunostaining ( Fig. 3 H and I). FOXJ1 þ cells were
accompanied by intense and polarized co-staining for acetylated-
alpha tubulin ( Fig. 3 HeI), consistent with mature ciliogenesis
[36]. DAPT treatment also dramatically reduced transcript levels of
CC10 while increasing transcript levels of MUC5AC ( Fig. 3 J). In
combination, these data demonstrate that the current airway
organoid culture conditions support gradual club and goblet cell
epithelial differentiation over time, and that the cells remain
capable of responding to additional cues to undergo enhanced
ciliated cell formation, recapitulating many of the maturation and
differentiation processes that play out in gold-standard ALI culture
of NHBE cells.
3.4. Expression of distal lung epithelial lineage markers in airway
organoids
In addition to epithelial clustering within compacted organoids,
we also observed invasive tubular structures emanating from
airway organoids with prolonged culture, as shown in a represen-
tative H &E stained section ( Fig. 4 A) and bright ﬁeld images of live
organoid cultures ( Fig. S3A, S3B ). In contrast, we did not observe
any invasive tubular structures forming from long-term NHBE
mono-cultures (day21, Fig. S3C) which instead remained uniformly
spherical in shape. Organoid invasive structures invariably
demonstrated close apposition of E-cadherin and vimentin im-
munostaining, suggesting close epithelial-mesenchymal cell
interactions ( Fig. 4 B). E-cadherin positive epithelial cells were
typically tightly surrounded by vimentin positive cells ( Fig. 4 C),
recapitulating epithelial-mesenchymal orientation during airway
branching morphogenesis [14,37]. Some epithelial- ﬁbroblast inva-
sive structures extended far from the originating organoid, with a
transition to a more ﬂattened and extended epithelial morphology
(Fig. 4 D) suggesting the possibility that aspects of distal lung
development might also be evoked within airway organoid culture.
The distal epithelium of the lung is lined by Type I and type II
alveolar epithelial cells (AECI, AECII). The AECI marker Aquaporin 5
(AQP5) [38e40] was strongly expressed within tubular structures
near the periphery of the main airway organoid body, and within
the thin epithelial lining of invasive projections ( Fig. 4 E and F),
where it co-stained with E-cadherin ( Fig. 4 G). Podoplanin (PDPN),
another marker of AECs highly expressed in lung parenchyma [41],
but also in lung ﬁbroblasts [42], was much more broadly distrib-
uted in the ﬁbroblast-populated area of human airway organoids,
but not typically in AQP5 þ or E-cadherin þ cells ( Fig. 4 E and F,
Fig. S3D ). In multiple instances we observed co-staining of the
more proximal epithelial marker CC10 with the distal epithelial
markers AQP5 and HOPX ( Fig. 4 IeL), implying considerable
complexity and the presence of immature or mixed-lineage
expression within areas of organoid-derived tubular structures,
consistent with noted epithelial cell type diversity in distal lung
development [43]. In other locations, relatively strong and exclu-
sive expression of distal epithelial markers were observed within
tubular structures ( Fig. 4 F, L), consistent with cells undergoing
further distal lineage-speci ﬁc differentiation. Additional evidence
for AECI lineage expression within airway organoids was obtained
by qPCR, which demonstrated prominent upregulation of AECI
markers AQP5, PDPN and HOPX
[5,23] over time ( Fig. 4M). Within
organoids, but distinct from invasive structures, we also observed
large epithelial clusters that were relatively devoid of interacting
ﬁbroblasts ( Fig. 4 H), and stained positively for CC10, the AECII
marker SPC, or both [31,44,45] (Fig. 4H), suggesting further regional
complexity in epithelial lineage marker expression within airway
organoids, and the potential emergence of unique mixed lineage
cells distinct from the original basal bronchial epithelial cell pop-
ulation. Taken together, our data demonstrates that the epithelium
within airway organoids displays remarkable plasticity, and in a
limited and surprising fashion recapitulates aspects of both prox-
imal airway and distal alveolar cell self-assembly and
differentiation.
3.5. Invasive tubular structures require actomyosin contraction and
localized YAP activation
The omission of ﬁbroblasts in our organoid culture led not only
to formation of smaller aggregates, but also to a failure of invasive
tubular structures to form ( Fig. 1 D, Fig. S3C ). These observations
suggested to us that both organoid formation and invasion requires
mechanical contributions, particularly those generated by con-
tractile ﬁbroblasts. In agreement with this concept, inhibition of
myosin II with blebbistatin both attenuated organoid compaction
and reduced the number and extent of invasive bud formation at
the periphery of airway organoids ( Fig. 5 AeC). Similar ﬁndings
were observed with the Rho kinase inhibitor Y27632 and the in-
hibitor of actin polymerization cytochalasin D ( Fig. 5 C), consistent
with an essential role for actomyosin-mediated contractile forces in
organoid formation as previously observed [25,28], and also for
tubular invasion as noted here. Interestingly, we observed that the
overall levels of cell proliferation, as quanti ﬁed by Ki67 immuno-
positive cells, were signi ﬁcantly higher in organoids treated with
blebbistatin, cytochalasin D and Y-27632 ( Fig. 5 HeJ, S3J, S3K )
consistent with proliferative effects of actomyosin inhibition in
Q. Tan et al. / Biomaterials 1 13 (2017) 1 18 e132 123

<<<PAGE 7>>>
Fig. 3. Proximal airway epithelial differentiation in airway organoids. Immunostaining of airway markers CC10 (red) and MUC5AC (green) at day 7, day 14, and day 21 (A eC).
Relative gene expression of CC10, CYP2E1, CYP3A5 and MUC5AC in the airway organoids at different time points as compared to NHBE 2D cell culture (D), n ¼ 3. ELISA mea-
surements of human MUC5AC production per organoid at each time point, n ¼ 5 (E). Airway organoids were stained with ciliated markers acetylated alpha-tubulin (red) and FOXJ1
(green) with low and high power magni ﬁcation in the airway organoids under control (F, G) and DAPT treatment conditions (H, I). Comparison of relative gene expression of FOXJ1,
CC10 and MUC5AC in the airway organoids between control and DAPT treated conditions (J), n ¼ 3. Values in graphs represent mean ± SEM; *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; t-test. Scale bars,
10 0 mm (A, B, C, F, H), 50 mm (G, I).
Q. Tan et al. / Biomaterials 1 13 (2017) 1 18 e132124

<<<PAGE 8>>>
other contexts [46,47], and suggestive of enhanced proliferation
also contributing to greater organoid size under these conditions.
The mechanoresponsive transcriptional regulator YAP has been
widely implicated in tissue morphogenesis [48,49], and plays
important roles in both lung epithelium [50e52] and mesenchyme
[53e55]. Therefore, we hypothesized that YAP activation may play
key roles in the formation of organoids and invasive tubular
structures. Knockdown of YAP by siRNA did not signiﬁcantly reduce
organoid compaction ( Fig. 5 C). However, immunostaining for YAP
demonstrated robust nuclear localization at the periphery of
organoids associated with invasive tubular structures ( Fig. 5 D and
F). Knockdown of YAP by siRNA ( Fig. S4D) signiﬁcantly diminished
invasive bud formation ( Fig. 5 C), demonstrating an essential role
for YAP in formation and invasion of these structures. Notably, YAP
knockdown disrupted the organization of epithelial and mesen-
chymal cells, as well as deposition of an organized ﬁbronectin
matrix ( Fig. 5 M), suggesting profound reliance on this mechanor-
esponsive pathway for tissue organization and morphogenesis
(S4A, S4E). Consistent with the mechanoresponsive nature of this
process, blebbistatin ( Fig. 5 E, G and N), cytochalasin D ( Fig. S4B,
Fig. 4. Expression of distal lung epithelial lineage markers in airway organoids. H &E staining of airway organoid section (A). Co-staining of E-cadherin (red) and Vimentin (green)
reveals diverse architecture of epithelial and mesenchymal compartments within airway organoids at day 21 in vitro with low- and high-power imaging (BeD). AECI markers AQP5
(red) and PDPN (green) were seen throughout the airway organoids with low- and high-power magni ﬁcation (E, F), as well as with E-cadherin (green) in the airway organoids (G).
Co-staining AQP5 (red) with CC10 (green) in the airway organoids with low- and high-power magni ﬁcation (I, J). AECII marker SPC (red) co-staining with Vimentin (green) the
airway organoids (H). Co-staining CC10 (red) with HOPX (green) in the airway organoids with low- and high-power magni ﬁcation (K, L). Relative gene expression of SPC, AQP5,
HOPX, and PDPN in airway organoids at different time points compared to NHBE 2D cell culture (M). Values in graphs represent mean ± SEM; n ¼ 3, *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; t-test.
Scale bars, 200 mm (A, B), 100 mm (E, G, H, I, K), 50 mm (C, D, F, J, L).
Q. Tan et al. / Biomaterials 1 13 (2017) 1 18 e132 125

<<<PAGE 9>>>
Q. Tan et al. / Biomaterials 1 13 (2017) 1 18 e132126

<<<PAGE 10>>>
S4F) and Y-27632 ( Fig. S4C, S4G ) disrupted the localized pattern of
YAP expression, as well as dramatically disorganizing epithelial-
mesenchymal distribution and patterns of ﬁbronectin deposition
within airway organoids. While overall cell proliferation was not
signiﬁcantly altered with YAP siRNA knockdown ( Fig. 5J, I, S4I), the
localized pattern of proliferation typically observed in invasive
tubular structures at the organoid edge ( Fig. 5H) was lost with YAP
knockdown ( Fig. S4I ). Similar disorganization of proliferation pat-
terns was observed with blebbistatin ( Fig. 5 I), cytochalasin D
(Fig. S4J ) and Y-27632 treatment ( S4K), consistent with prior ob-
servations of mechanical patterning of proliferation via YAP [56].
Based on previous observations that YAP plays a critical role in
airway epithelial patterning, we also examined expression of basal
and luminal epithelial markers after treatment to disrupt actomy-
osin or knockdown YAP by siRNA. Real-time PCR analysis demon-
strated that basal cell markers KRT5 and KRT14 were signi ﬁcantly
reduced ( Fig. 5 L) and airway club cell differentiation marker CC10
were up-regulated with YAP siRNA or actomyosin disruption
(Fig. 5K). We also observed YAP nuclear localization and expression
of CC10 were exclusive of one another in the organoid ( Fig. S4H,
S4L). These observations are consistent with prior in vivo ﬁndings
that YAP expression controls progenitor cell fate in the lungs and
promotes a basal cell expression program [52,57], demonstrating
that the organoid system recapitulates aspects of YAP-mediated
epithelial fate determination observed in mouse models of lung
development.
3.6. Modeling a ﬁbrogenic stimulus response in human airway
organoids
Currently, in vitro studies of lung ﬁbrosis typically focus on a
single cell types, especially ﬁbroblasts [58] or lung epithelial cells
[59]. The close proximity of primary lung epithelial cells and
mesenchymal cells within airway organoids prompted us to
investigate whether our model could be useful for studying the
orchestrated responses of multiple cell types to a ﬁbrogenic stim-
ulus. Therefore we employed a pathophysiologically relevant pro-
ﬁbrotic stimulus, TGF- b1 [60]. Not only is TGF- b1 highly relevant
in the context of pulmonary ﬁbrosis [61], it is implicated in lung
development [62], airway and alveolar remodeling [63], and is
known to evoke profound responses in primary human epithelial,
endothelial and mesenchymal cell types [60]. To evaluate the
response to TGF- b1, we treated airway organoids (AOs) with 5 ng/
mL TGF-b1 for 96 h and then analyzed gene expression by qPCR and
organoid morphology by immunoﬂuorescence. We found that TGF-
b1 treatment inhibited/reversed tubular invasion of the matrix at
the periphery of airway organoids ( Fig. 6A), consistent with known
inhibitory effects of TGF- b1 on lung branching and epithelial dif-
ferentiation in embryonic and fetal lung in vivo [64]. Immuno ﬂu-
orescence imaging demonstrated increasing aSMA expression
(Fig. 6 B) with TGF- b1 treatment, and qPCR con ﬁrmed signi ﬁcant
induction of several ﬁbrogenic genes in airway organoids, including
FN(1.5-fold), ACTA2 (2.3-fold), CTGF(1.6-fold) as shown in Fig. 6 C.
To address which cell types contribute to increased aSMA, we
labeled either ﬁbroblasts (HLF) or epithelial cells (NHBE) with
CellTracker™ Red CMTPX prior to organoid formation, then treated
with TGF- b1 as above and used immuno ﬂuorescence imaging to
visualize aSMA þ cells. Co-staining of aSMA was observed with
both CellTracker þ ﬁbroblasts ( Fig. S5A ) and epithelial cells
(Fig. S5B ), indicating the both ﬁbroblasts and epithelial cells
contribute to the enhanced aSMA expression under TGF- b1 treat-
ment, echoing prior observations of TGF- b1 responses in primary
bronchial epithelial cells [65]. Interestingly, TGF- b1 had the oppo-
site effect on expression of proximal lung epithelial cell markers
CC10 and FOXJ1 and the distal lung epithelial cell marker AQP5, all
of which decreased dramatically after treatment ( Fig. 6 D). Mean-
while, the expression of airway epithelial basal cell markers (P63,
KRT5) were increased by TGF- b1 treatment ( Fig. 6 E). These obser-
vations highlight the robust multicellular effects of TGF- b1i n
airway organoids, with simultaneous increases in ﬁbrogenic gene
expression and decreases in expression of epithelial differentiation
markers, and support the potential for this model to be used in
elucidating cell-cell interactions that regulate tissue level responses
to ﬁbrogenic stimuli.
3.7. Ectopic transplantation of human airway organoids
To evaluate whether airway organoids can be transplanted
in vivo and are capable of surviving and vascularizing in vivo, we
transplanted day 7 airway organoids, embedded within Matrigel,
under the kidney capsule of NSG mice. Kidneys were harvested
after 1 week or 6 weeks for visual and microscopic examination.
Organoids were easily visible after 1 week in the kidney capsule
(Fig. S6A ). At 1 week after implantation there was prominent pro-
liferation in the vicinity of the implanted organoid, particularly at
the interface between host tissue and airway organoid grafts.
However, co-staining with human speci ﬁc E-cadherin ( Fig. 7B) and
vimentin ( Fig. 7 C), along with an antibody speci ﬁc to human
mitochondria ( Fig. 7 A), demonstrated that the vast majority of
proliferation was not within airway organoid cells, but rather
within host tissue. Human speci ﬁc CD31
þ endothelial cells were
observed within airway organoids ( Fig. 7 EeH), with some in close
proximity to epithelial tubular structures ( Fig. 7EeF), while others
were distributed outside epithelial structures surrounded by ﬁ-
broblasts (Fig. 7 GeH).
By week 6 after implantation organoids regressed in size. Under
microscopic visualization the remaining human cells appeared to
be fewer in number ( Fig. 7 D), and although human speci ﬁc
CD31þ endothelial cells were observed, they were less abundant
than at 1 week, and restricted to the edge of the implanted orga-
noid ( Fig. S6B, S6C ). In contrast, abundant host vasculature, as
indicated by anti-CD31 antibody that reacts with both mouse and
human (green) was found to have broadly invaded the organoid
area ( Fig. S6B, S6C ). Thus, while we did not observe any direct
human to mouse vasculature connection, these observations are
consistent with a robust capability of airway organoids to recruit
host vasculature. Further immunostaining with lung epithelial
differentiation markers demonstrated enriched and relatively
distinct expression of proximal secretory airway epithelial cell
marker CC10 ( Fig. 7 K, L, S6D) or distal alveolar epithelial markers
AQP5 ( Fig. 7 K, L, S6E) and SPC ( Fig. 7 I and J), consistent with the
remarkable epithelial plasticity observed in airway organoids
Fig. 5. Invasive tubular structures require localized YAP and actomyosin. Tubular outgrowths from airway organoids invade surrounding matrix shown in the control (A), loss of
such structures with blebbistatin treatment (B). Quanti ﬁcation the number of invasive tubular structures (number of buds) and the average diameter of airway organoids in different
treatment groups comparing with control (C). Co-staining of YAP/TAZ (red) and E-cadherin (CDH1, green) reveals high expressing YAP/TAZ cells withi n invasive epithelial tubular
structures of airway organoids in the control (D) and their relative loss and disorganization in blebbistatin treatment group (E). Co-staining of YA P/TAZ (red) and Vimentin (green) in
the control (F) and blebbistatin treatment group (G). Co-staining of Ki67 (red) and Vimentin (green) in the control (H) and blebbistatin treatment gr oup (I), along with quanti ﬁcation
of Ki67 positive cells (J). Co-staining of Fibronectin (red) and Vimentin (green) in the control (M) and blebbistatin treatment group (N). Relative g ene expression of KRT5, KRT14 and
CC10 in airway organoids with and without Si-YAP, blebbistatin and cytochalasin D treatment (K, L). Values in graphs represent mean ± SEM; n ¼ 3, *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; t-test. Scale
bars, 200 mm( A eB), 100 mm (D, E, F, G, H, I, M, N).
Q. Tan et al. / Biomaterials 1 13 (2017) 1 18 e132 127

<<<PAGE 11>>>
Q. Tan et al. / Biomaterials 1 13 (2017) 1 18 e132128

<<<PAGE 12>>>
in vitro, but with less evidence of the mixed-lineage cells observed
in vitro. In combination with the relative paucity of proliferation
observed at 1 week, and the general lack of ectopic tissue growth
from week 1 e6, our results suggest that ectopic transplantation of
airway organoids in vivo prompted a shift toward cell lineage
commitment and differentiation toward mature, non-proliferating
states. Thus our data demonstrate that the bronchial epithelial,
mesenchymal and vascular cells in the airway organoid can survive
and undergo considerable maturation following engraftment
in vivo. However, under the present conditions adult human airway
organoids did not undergo robust growth and expansion when
ectopically transplanted under the kidney capsule, suggesting a
somewhat limited regenerative potential of the current system.
4. Discussion
We report the development of airway organoids from a mixed
population of human adult lung epithelial, mesenchymal and
endothelial cells. We observed a remarkable capacity for self-
assembly, morphogenesis, and differentiation within airway orga-
noids that mimicked many aspects of lung tissue formation and
maturation. Lung organoids have recently been reported from
human iPS cells [19], and smaller organoids have been formed from
deﬁned lung progenitors alone or in combination with supportive
niche cells [21e23]. Our study differs from these efforts in two key
ways. First, we used an unsorted population of human adult-
derived cells. This is advantageous from a tissue sourcing
perspective as all of the cells were commercially available, but
clearly limiting in delineating mechanisms of differentiation, and in
the observed limited proliferative potential of human adult cell-
derived airway organoids. Second, we used organ bud culture
conditions [25] which allowed a mixed population of cells to
rapidly aggregate and self-condense, organize and engage in
reciprocal cell-cell interactions. Such a method is ideal for engi-
neering organ buds from a large mixed cell population, and offers
the potential to create relatively large and transplantable tissue-
like aggregates, but is clearly less amenable to mechanistic
dissection of cellular lineage and fate choices during organoid
culture.
Interestingly, we observed expression of both proximal and
distal epithelial markers within airway organoids. Our source for
lung epithelium was commercially available normal human bron-
chial epithelial cells with a predominant basal cell phenotype. Lung
epithelial cells in general display tremendous plasticity in
Fig. 7. Ectopic transplantation of human airway organoids. Human mitochondria (green, A, D), human E-Cadherin (green, B) human Vimentin (green, C), and pro liferating cells
(Ki67, red, A-D) were assessed by immunostaining at the week 1(A eC) and week 6 (D). Human endothelial cells were assessed by human CD31 (red) co-staining with human E-
cadherin (green, E, F) and human Vimentin (green, G, H) at week 1. SPC (red) were used for additional epithelial staining with low- and high-power magni ﬁcation (I, J), as was
double staining for AQP5 (red) and CC10 (green) with low- and high-power magni ﬁcation (K, L). Scale bars, 200 mm (B, C), 100 mm (A, D, E, G, I, K), 50 mm (F, H, J, L). n ¼ 4.
Fig. 6. TGF-b1 responses in human airway organoids. Tubular outgrowths from airway organoids invade surrounding matrix without TGF- b1 treatment, absence of such outgrowths
with TGF-b1 treatment (A). aSMA (green) staining of airway organoids with and without TGF- b1 treatment (B). Relative gene expression of ACTA2, CTGF, FN (C), CC10, FOXJ1, AQP5
(D) and P63, KRT5, KRT14 (E) in airway organoids with and without TGF- b1 treatment. Values in graphs represent mean ± SEM; n ¼ 4, *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; t-test. Scale bars, 100 mm
(A), 50 mm (B).
Q. Tan et al. / Biomaterials 1 13 (2017) 1 18 e132 129

<<<PAGE 13>>>
regenerative contexts [66]. Recent studies have shown that adult
airway epithelial cells preserve the potential, when needed, to
proliferate, migrate and differentiate into several cell types during
the severe lung injury [8,67 ,68]. Our study shows that an unsorted
population of NHBE cells maintains surprising potential to express
hallmarks of both proximal and distal epithelial lineages found in
the adult lung. Recent studies have shown that the fate and mul-
tilineage potential of epithelial stem cells can change depending on
whether a stem cell exists within its resident niche and responds to
normal tissue homeostasis, whether it is mobilized to repair a
wound, or whether it is taken from its niche and undergoes de novo
tissue morphogenesis after transplantation [69]. Additional efforts
will be needed to determine if the remarkable epithelial plasticity
observed here re ﬂects the unique niche(s) provided by organoid
culture, or instead re ﬂects the mixed starting epithelial population
and the possible presence of alveolar (or other) lung progenitors
with distal lineage potential. In addition, further investigation of
additional niche cells speci ﬁc to the proximal airways, such as
airway smooth muscle cells [70], may offer additional insight into
the cell-cell interactions that regulate airway epithelial differenti-
ation within our organoid system. Whatever the outcome of these
future studies, the results provided here demonstrate a remarkable
potential for an adult human lung epithelial population to self-
organize and mature toward both airway and alveolar lineages,
suggesting the presence of important cell-cell interactions within
airway organoids that merit further investigation.
One striking observation from our airway organoids was the
formation of invasive tubular structures that recapitulated the basic
architecture of epithelial and mesenchyme juxtaposition observed
during lung development. Multicellular tubular structures are
essential elements in formation of complex organs and tissues, and
their formation here by budding from the central organoid mass
mimics, though clearly in a limited fashion, a basic aspect of organ
development. Despite the formation of these invasive structures,
we note that distinct highly-organized and integrated proximal and
distal structures mimicking mature airway and alveoli were not
commonly observed in the organoids. Rather, while the organoids
display remarkable self-organization capacity, the patterns of
cellular differentiation and morphogenesis suggest a relatively
stochastic process, as is apparent in detailed IF images ( Figs. 3e4).
This is perhaps due to the organoid formation process we have
adopted, in which compaction of the mixed cell population gen-
erates local variations in epithelial, endothelial and ﬁbroblast cell
densities, superimposed on the cellular variability inherent to these
cell populations. Thus while the organoids display robust self-
organizing capacity and potential for differentiation in vitro, they
remain far from mature lung tissue. Our observations are similar to
other organoids studies [25,71,72]that show that in vivo incubation
is essential to further maturation and organization of tissue like
functionality in organoids beyond the relatively primitive embry-
onic tissue-like states that form in vitro.
Excitingly, we were able to demonstrate that molecular control
over organoid invasion and differentiation appears to be governed
by YAP, consistent with its important role in airway branching,
morphogenesis and differentiation in the developing lung
[50e52,54,55,57], suggesting that airway organoid formation re-
capitulates key signaling aspects of lung development. Better un-
derstanding the morphogenetic function of YAP could facilitate
advances in generating complex tissue engineered structures such
as organoids, and given YAP's mechanoresponsive nature [53,56],
our ﬁndings suggests that exogenous control of mechanical forces
to better mimic the developmental environment may be necessary
to promote enhanced organoid growth and morphogenesis [73].A
major goal going forward will be to focus on cell signaling and
genetic factors that guide branching morphogenesis of airway
organoids, as well as regulatory cues from ECM, mesenchyme and
vascular endothelial cells that in ﬂuence cellular differentiation and
organoid morphogenesis.
We also demonstrated the capacity for ectopic transplantation
of human adult airway organoids into immuno-deﬁcient mice, with
the presence of both recruited host vascular cells and lineage-
speciﬁc differentiation of graft epithelial cells. While the observed
in vivo differentiation potential was supportive of possible future
application of this approach in regenerating functional lung tissue,
several barriers remain. Notably, engrafted airway organoids did
not grow over time, suggesting limited proliferative potential of the
adult-derived cells used in our approach. More proliferative re-
sponses have been previously reported when using selected resi-
dent lung epithelial progenitor subpopulations [67,74] or
immortalized airway derived cells [75]; thus, sorting and utilization
of resident progenitor populations may provide improvements in
organoid growth [76]. Alternatively, fetal-derived lung cells may
offer growth advantages innate to their developmental state, and
have been shown previously to undergo organoid-like organization
and growth [77,78]. Ultimately, human iPS-derived cells driven
toward lung lineages may provide the clinically-relevant cell source
needed for patient-speci ﬁc applications [79,80]. Moving from
ectopic transplantation of airway organoids to lung-speci ﬁc appli-
cation will require further development of tissue implantation
strategies. Recent work has demonstrated successful attachment
and vascular recruitment into biocompatible hydrogels on the
pleural surface of the lung [81], suggesting one possible path for-
ward. Further efforts to improve vascularization may also be critical
in supporting organoid engraftment and growth. A recent study
demonstrated that co-seeding of endothelial and perivascular cells
is essential to successful revascularization of decellularized lung
tissue [82]. Sorting and seeding of mesenchymal cell sub-
populations that support vascularization in organoids may be one
means by which to enhance organoid growth and engraftment
potential. Finally, inclusion of additional matrix and soluble cues
[13] will likely be essential to further optimize cell organization,
growth and differentiation, and in vivo integration of airway
organoid grafts with host tissue.
A more immediate opportunity for use of airway organoids is
apparent in the realm of disease-modeling. There is a clear ratio-
nale and drive to develop new 3D multi-cell culture models that
overcome limitations of traditional 2D culture systems, allowing
cells to grow and respond in environments that mimic native tissue
and promote close interactions between cells, ECM, and soluble
cues [83]. In this study, we demonstrated that the ﬁbrogenic factor
TGF-
b1 not only enhances expression of mesenchymal genes
implicated in ﬁbrosis, but simultaneously and dramatically atten-
uates expression of both proximal and distal lung epithelial dif-
ferentiation markers. The airway organoid method developed here
provides a tractable method by which cellular and molecular re-
sponses to disease-relevant perturbations can be studied within a
3D tissue-like environment approximating the native lung. Because
mixed human cell populations are used, extension of this method
to human primary disease-derived cells is straight-forward, and
will allow comparison of normal and pathological cell population
interactions under baseline and disease modeling conditions. The
resulting platform has the potential to become a valuable tool for
assessing tissue-, cell- and molecular-level responses, and for
evaluating novel therapies and patient-speci ﬁc interventions.
5. Conclusion
Our results demonstrate that multicellular airway organoids
derived from adult human cells are able to self-organize and
mature toward lung tissue-like structures. Fibroblasts are essential
Q. Tan et al. / Biomaterials 1 13 (2017) 1 18 e132130

<<<PAGE 14>>>
for the self-condensation of aggregates into mechanically stable
airway organoids, and likely play a continuing role in reciprocal
interactions with endothelial and epithelial cells. YAP was neces-
sary for organization and invasion of tubular structures, and
controlled aspects of epithelial differentiation, mimicking key as-
pects of in vivo lung development. Despite the proximal source of
primary epithelium used in the airway organoids, both proximal
and distal epithelial markers were expressed over time both in vitro
and in vivo, demonstrating remarkable epithelial plasticity within
organoid cultures. Successful ectopic engraftment of airway orga-
noids represented an important initial step toward future applica-
tion in lung regenerative approaches, though many challenges
remain. Finally, airway organoids assembled from adult human
primary cells represent a new and potentially powerful tool within
which to study physiologic and pathologic cell-cell interactions.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NIH HL092961, the Caerus Foun-
dation, as well as a Postdoctoral Fellowship Award in Regenerative
Medicine and Science from the Mayo Clinic Center for Regenerative
Medicine. We thank Dr. Gary C. Sieck and Dr. Y.S. Prakash for
providing access to cryosection facility and other equipment sup-
port. We thank Dr. Andrew Haak for image analysis support, and Dr.
Giovanni Ligresti for helpful discussion. We thank Yunhua Fang and
Kristin J. Mantz for their technical support.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data related to this article can be found at http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2016.10.046.
References
[1] T. Ferkol, D. Schraufnagel, The global burden of respiratory disease, Ann. Am.
Thorac. Soc. 11 (2014) 404 e406.
[2] K.F. Rabe, S. Hurd, A. Anzueto, P.J. Barnes, S.A. Buist, P. Calverley, et al., Global
strategy for the diagnosis, management, and prevention of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease: GOLD executive summary, Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med.
176 (2007) 532 e555.
[3] S.M. Arcasoy, R.M. Kotloff, Lung transplantation, N. Engl. J. Med. 340 (1999)
1081e1091.
[4] A.N. Lau, M. Goodwin, C.F. Kim, D.J. Weiss, Stem cells and regenerative
medicine in lung biology and diseases, Mol. Ther. 20 (2012) 1116 e1130.
[5] D.N. Kotton, E.E. Morrisey, Lung regeneration: mechanisms, applications and
emerging stem cell populations, Nat. Med. 20 (2014) 822 e832.
[6] B.L. Hogan, C.E. Barkauskas, H.A. Chapman, J.A. Epstein, R. Jain, C.C. Hsia, et al.,
Repair and regeneration of the respiratory system: complexity, plasticity, and
mechanisms of lung stem cell function, Cell Stem Cell. 15 (2014) 123 e138.
[7] S.X. Huang, M.D. Green, A.T. de Carvalho, M. Mumau, Y.W. Chen, S.L. D'Souza,
et al., The in vitro generation of lung and airway progenitor cells from human
pluripotent stem cells, Nat. Protoc. 10 (2015) 413 e425.
[8] W. Zuo, T. Zhang, D.Z. Wu, S.P. Guan, A.A. Liew, Y. Yamamoto, et al., p63( þ)
Krt5(þ) distal airway stem cells are essential for lung regeneration, Nature
517 (2015) 616 e620.
[9] C. Rosen, E. Shezen, A. Aronovich, Y.Z. Klionsky, Y. Yaakov, M. Assayag, et al.,
Preconditioning allows engraftment of mouse and human embryonic lung
cells, enabling lung repair in mice, Nat. Med. 21 (2015) 869 e879.
[10] H.C. Ott, B. Clippinger, C. Conrad, C. Schuetz, I. Pomerantseva, L. Ikonomou, et
al., Regeneration and orthotopic transplantation of a bioarti ﬁcial lung, Nat.
Med. 16 (2010) 927 e933.
[11] A.P. Price, K.A. England, A.M. Matson, B.R. Blazar, A. Panoskaltsis-Mortari,
Development of a decellularized lung bioreactor system for bioengineering
the lung: the matrix reloaded, Tissue Eng. Part A 16 (2010) 2581 e2591.
[12] T.H. Petersen, E.A. Calle, L. Zhao, E.J. Lee, L. Gui, M.B. Raredon, et al., Tissue-
engineered lungs for in vivo implantation, Science 329 (2010) 538 e541.
[13] Y.S. Prakash, D.J. Tschumperlin, K.R. Stenmark, Coming to terms with tissue
engineering and regenerative medicine in the lung, Am. J. Physiol. Lung Cell
Mol. Physiol. 309 (2015) L625 eL638.
[14] A.M. Zorn, J.M. Wells, Vertebrate endoderm development and organ forma-
tion, Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 25 (2009) 221 e251.
[15] Y. Sasai, Next-generation regenerative medicine: organogenesis from stem
cells in 3D culture, Cell Stem Cell 12 (2013) 520 e530.
[16] M.A. Lancaster, J.A. Knoblich, Organogenesis in a dish: modeling development
and disease using organoid technologies, Science 345 (2014) 1247125 .
[17] N. Hattori, Cerebral organoids model human brain development and micro-
cephaly, Mov. Disord. 29 (2014) 185 .
[18] T. Takebe, R.R. Zhang, H. Koike, M. Kimura, E. Yoshizawa, M. Enomura, et al.,
Generation of a vascularized and functional human liver from an iPSC-derived
organ bud transplant, Nat. Protoc. 9 (2014) 396 e409.
[19] B.R. Dye, D.R. Hill, M.A. Ferguson, Y.H. Tsai, M.S. Nagy, R. Dyal, et al., In vitro
generation of human pluripotent stem cell derived lung organoids, Elife
(2015) 4 .
[20] M. Huch, H. Gehart, R. van Boxtel, K. Hamer, F. Blokzijl, M.M. Verstegen, et al.,
Long-term culture of genome-stable bipotent stem cells from adult human
liver, Cell 160 (2015) 299 e312.
[21] J.R. Rock, M.W. Onaitis, E.L. Rawlins, Y. Lu, C.P. Clark, Y. Xue, et al., Basal cells as
stem cells of the mouse trachea and human airway epithelium, Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 106 (2009) 12771 e12775.
[22] J.H. Lee, D.H. Bhang, A. Beede, T.L. Huang, B.R. Stripp, K.D. Bloch, et al., Lung
stem cell differentiation in mice directed by endothelial cells via a BMP4-
NFATc1-thrombospondin-1 axis, Cell 156 (2014) 440 e455.
[23] C.E. Barkauskas, M.J. Cronce, C.R. Rackley, E.J. Bowie, D.R. Keene, B.R. Stripp, et
al., Type 2 alveolar cells are stem cells in adult lung, J. Clin. Investig. 123
(2013) 3025 e3036.
[24] S. Yui, T. Nakamura, T. Sato, Y. Nemoto, T. Mizutani, X. Zheng, et al., Functional
engraftment of colon epithelium expanded in vitro from a single adult
Lgr5(þ) stem cell, Nat. Med. 18 (2012) 618 e623.
[25] T. Takebe, K. Sekine, M. Enomura, H. Koike, M. Kimura, T. Ogaeri, et al., Vas-
cularized and functional human liver from an iPSC-derived organ bud trans-
plant, Nature 499 (2013) 481 e484.
[26] C. Greggio, F. De Franceschi, M. Figueiredo-Larsen, S. Gobaa, A. Ranga,
H. Semb, et al., Arti ﬁcial three-dimensional niches deconstruct pancreas
development in vitro, Development 140 (2013) 4452 e4462.
[27] T. Thundat, R.J. Warmack, G.Y. Chen, D.P. Allison, Thermal and ambient-
induced de ﬂections of scanning force microscope cantilevers, Appl. Phys.
Lett. 64 (1994) 2894 e2896.
[28] T. Takebe, M. Enomura, E. Yoshizawa, M. Kimura, H. Koike, Y. Ueno, et al.,
Vascularized and complex organ buds from diverse tissues via mesenchymal
cell-driven condensation, Cell Stem Cell 16 (2015) 556 e565.
[29] C. Wansleeben, C.E. Barkauskas, J.R. Rock, B.L. Hogan, Stem cells of the adult
lung: their development and role in homeostasis, regeneration, and disease,
Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Dev. Biol. 2 (2013) 131 e148.
[30] M.L. Fulcher, S. Gabriel, K.A. Burns, J.R. Yankaskas, S.H. Randell, Well-differ-
entiated human airway epithelial cell cultures, Methods Mol. Med. 107 (2005)
183e206.
[31] E.L. Rawlins, T. Okubo, Y. Xue, D.M. Brass, R.L. Auten, H. Hasegawa, et al., The
role of Scgb1a1 þ Clara cells in the long-term maintenance and repair of lung
airway, but not alveolar, epithelium, Cell Stem Cell 4 (2009) 525 e534.
[32] M.V. Fanucchi, M.E. Murphy, A.R. Buckpitt, R.M. Philpot, C.G. Plopper, Pul-
monary cytochrome P450 monooxygenase and Clara cell differentiation in
mice, Am. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol. 17 (1997) 302 e314.
[33] D.F. Rogers, Airway goblet cells: responsive and adaptable front-line de-
fenders, Eur. Respir. J. 7 (1994) 1690 e1706.
[34] E.L. Rawlins, B.L. Hogan, Ciliated epithelial cell lifespan in the mouse trachea
and lung, Am. J. Physiol. Lung Cell Mol. Physiol. 295 (2008) L231 eL234.
[35] J.R. Rock, X. Gao, Y. Xue, S.H. Randell, Y.Y. Kong, B.L. Hogan, Notch-dependent
differentiation of adult airway basal stem cells, Cell Stem Cell 8 (2011)
639e648.
[36] H. Ishikawa, W.F. Marshall, Ciliogenesis: building the cell's antenna, Nat. Rev.
Mol. Cell Biol. 12 (2011) 222 e234.
[37] M. Herriges, E.E. Morrisey, Lung development: orchestrating the generation
and regeneration of a complex organ, Development 141 (2014) 502 e513.
[38] M.C. McElroy, M. Kasper, The use of alveolar epithelial type I cell-selective
markers to investigate lung injury and repair, Eur. Respir. J. 24 (2004)
664e673.
[39] P. Flodby, Z. Borok, A. Banfalvi, B. Zhou, D. Gao, P. Minoo, et al., Directed
expression of Cre in alveolar epithelial type 1 cells, Am. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol.
43 (2010) 173 e178.
[40] S.M. Kreda, M.C. Gynn, D.A. Fenstermacher, R.C. Boucher, S.E. Gabriel,
Expression and localization of epithelial aquaporins in the adult human lung,
Am. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol. 24 (2001) 224 e234.
[41] M.I. Ramirez, G. Millien, A. Hinds, Y. Cao, D.C. Seldin, M.C. Williams, T1alpha, a
lung type I cell differentiation gene, is required for normal lung cell prolif-
eration and alveolus formation at birth, Dev. Biol. 256 (2003) 61 e72.
[42] A. Hoshino, G. Ishii, T. Ito, K. Aoyagi, Y. Ohtaki, K. Nagai, et al., Podoplanin-
positive ﬁbroblasts enhance lung adenocarcinoma tumor formation: podo-
planin in ﬁbroblast functions for tumor progression, Cancer Res. 71 (2011)
4769e4779.
[43] B. Treutlein, D.G. Brown ﬁeld, A.R. Wu, N.F. Neff, G.L. Mantalas, F.H. Espinoza,
et al., Reconstructing lineage hierarchies of the distal lung epithelium using
single-cell RNA-seq, Nature 509 (2014) 371 e375.
[44] C.F. Kim, E.L. Jackson, A.E. Woolfenden, S. Lawrence, I. Babar, S. Vogel, et al.,
Identi
ﬁcation of bronchioalveolar stem cells in normal lung and lung cancer,
Cell 121 (2005) 823 e835.
[45] C.F. Kim, Paving the road for lung stem cell biology: bronchioalveolar stem
cells and other putative distal lung stem cells, Am. J. Physiol. Lung Cell Mol.
Physiol. 293 (2007) L1092 eL1098.
[46] F.A. Suprynowicz, G. Upadhyay, E. Krawczyk, S.C. Kramer, J.D. Hebert, X. Liu, et
Q. Tan et al. / Biomaterials 1 13 (2017) 1 18 e132 131

<<<PAGE 15>>>
al., Conditionally reprogrammed cells represent a stem-like state of adult
epithelial cells, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 109 (2012) 20035 e20040.
[47] J.D. Mih, A. Marinkovic, F. Liu, A.S. Sharif, D.J. Tschumperlin, Matrix stiffness
reverses the effect of actomyosin tension on cell proliferation, J. Cell Sci. 125
(2012) 5974 e5983.
[48] S. Porazinski, H. Wang, Y. Asaoka, M. Behrndt, T. Miyamoto, H. Morita, et al.,
YAP is essential for tissue tension to ensure vertebrate 3D body shape, Nature
521 (2015) 217 e221.
[49] B.C. Low, C.Q. Pan, G.V. Shivashankar, A. Bershadsky, M. Sudol, M. Sheetz, YAP/
TAZ as mechanosensors and mechanotransducers in regulating organ size and
tumor growth, FEBS Lett. 588 (2014) 2663 e2670.
[50] R. Zhao, T.R. Fallon, S.V. Saladi, A. Pardo-Saganta, J. Villoria, H. Mou, et al., Yap
tunes airway epithelial size and architecture by regulating the identity,
maintenance, and self-renewal of stem cells, Dev. Cell 30 (2014) 151 e165.
[51] J.E. Mahoney, M. Mori, A.D. Szymaniak, X. Varelas, W.V. Cardoso, The hippo
pathway effector Yap controls patterning and differentiation of airway
epithelial progenitors, Dev. Cell 30 (2014) 137 e150.
[52] A.D. Szymaniak, J.E. Mahoney, W.V. Cardoso, X. Varelas, Crumbs3-Mediated
polarity directs airway epithelial cell fate through the hippo pathway effector
yap, Dev. Cell 34 (2015) 283 e296.
[53] S. Dupont, L. Morsut, M. Aragona, E. Enzo, S. Giulitti, M. Cordenonsi, et al., Role
of YAP/TAZ in mechanotransduction, Nature 474 (2011) 179 e183.
[54] F. Liu, D. Lagares, K.M. Choi, L. Stopfer, A. Marinkovic, V. Vrbanac, et al.,
Mechanosignaling through YAP and TAZ drives ﬁbroblast activation and
ﬁbrosis, Am. J. Physiol. Lung Cell Mol. Physiol. 308 (2015) L344 eL357.
[55] T. Bertero, K.A. Cottrill, Y. Lu, C.M. Haeger, P. Dieffenbach, S. Annis, et al.,
Matrix remodeling promotes pulmonary hypertension through feedback
mechanoactivation of the YAP/TAZ-miR-130/301 circuit, Cell Rep. 13 (2015)
1016e1032.
[56] M. Aragona, T. Panciera, A. Manfrin, S. Giulitti, F. Michielin, N. Elvassore, et al.,
A mechanical checkpoint controls multicellular growth through YAP/TAZ
regulation by actin-processing factors, Cell 154 (2013) 1047 e1059.
[57] A.W. Lange, A. Sridharan, Y. Xu, B.R. Stripp, A.K. Perl, J.A. Whitsett, Hippo/Yap
signaling controls epithelial progenitor cell proliferation and differentiation in
the embryonic and adult lung, J. Mol. Cell Biol. 7 (2015) 35 e47.
[58] R.T. Kendall, C.A. Feghali-Bostwick, Fibroblasts in ﬁbrosis: novel roles and
mediators, Front. Pharmacol. 5 (2014) 123 .
[59] T.S. Blackwell, A.M. Tager, Z. Borok, B.B. Moore, D.A. Schwartz, K.J. Anstrom, et
al., Future directions in idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis research. An NHLBI
workshop report, Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 189 (2014) 214 e222.
[60] A. Leask, D.J. Abraham, TGF-beta signaling and the
ﬁbrotic response, Faseb J.
18 (2004) 816 e827.
[61] T.A. Wynn, Integrating mechanisms of pulmonary ﬁbrosis, J. Exp. Med. 208
(2011) 1339 e1350.
[62] U. Bartram, C.P. Speer, The role of transforming growth factor beta in lung
development and disease, Chest 125 (2004) 754 e765.
[63] C.G. Lee, H.R. Kang, R.J. Homer, G. Chupp, J.A. Elias, Transgenic modeling of
transforming growth factor-beta(1): role of apoptosis in ﬁbrosis and alveolar
remodeling, Proc. Am. Thorac. Soc. 3 (2006) 418 e423.
[64] X. Zeng, M. Gray, M.T. Stahlman, J.A. Whitsett, TGF-beta1 perturbs vascular
development and inhibits epithelial differentiation in fetal lung in vivo, Dev.
Dyn. 221 (2001) 289 e301.
[65] T.L. Hackett, S.M. Warner, D. Stefanowicz, F. Shaheen, D.V. Pechkovsky,
L.A. Murray, et al., Induction of epithelial-mesenchymal transition in primary
airway epithelial cells from patients with asthma by transforming growth
factor-beta1, Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 180 (2009) 122 e133.
[66] C. Blanpain, E. Fuchs, Stem cell plasticity. Plasticity of epithelial stem cells in
tissue regeneration, Science 344 (2014) 1242281 .
[67] A.E. Vaughan, A.N. Brumwell, Y. Xi, J.E. Gotts, D.G. Brown ﬁeld, B. Treutlein, et
al., Lineage-negative progenitors mobilize to regenerate lung epithelium after
major injury, Nature 517 (2015) 621 e625.
[68] P.A. Kumar, Y. Hu, Y. Yamamoto, N.B. Hoe, T.S. Wei, D. Mu, et al., Distal airway
stem cells yield alveoli in vitro and during lung regeneration following H1N1
inﬂuenza infection, Cell 147 (2011) 525 e538.
[69] G. Donati, F.M. Watt, Stem cell heterogeneity and plasticity in epithelia, Cell
Stem Cell 16 (2015) 465 e476.
[70] T. Volckaert, E. Dill, A. Campbell, C. Tiozzo, S. Majka, S. Bellusci, et al., Para-
bronchial smooth muscle constitutes an airway epithelial stem cell niche in
the mouse lung after injury, J. Clin. Investig. 121 (2011) 4409 e4419.
[71] C.L. Watson, M.M. Mahe, J. Munera, J.C. Howell, N. Sundaram, H.M. Poling, et
al., An in vivo model of human small intestine using pluripotent stem cells,
Nat. Med. 20 (2014) 1310 e1314.
[72] C. Xinaris, V. Benedetti, P. Rizzo, M. Abbate, D. Corna, N. Azzollini, et al., In vivo
maturation of functional renal organoids formed from embryonic cell sus-
pensions, J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 23 (2012) 1857 e1868.
[73] C.M. Nelson, J.P. Gleghorn, Sculpting organs: mechanical regulation of tissue
development, Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 14 (2012) 129 e154.
[74] H.A. Chapman, X. Li, J.P. Alexander, A. Brumwell, W. Lorizio, K. Tan, et al.,
Integrin alpha6beta4 identi
ﬁes an adult distal lung epithelial population with
regenerative potential in mice, J. Clin. Investig. 121 (2011) 2855 e2862.
[75] S.R. Franzdottir, I.T. Axelsson, A.J. Arason, O. Baldursson, T. Gudjonsson,
M.K. Magnusson, Airway branching morphogenesis in three dimensional
culture, Respir. Res. 11 (2010) 162 .
[76] E.J. Ruiz, F. Oeztuerk-Winder, J.J. Ventura, A paracrine network regulates the
cross-talk between human lung stem cells and the stroma, Nat. Commun. 5
(2014) 3175 .
[77] M.J. Mondrinos, S. Koutzaki, P.I. Lelkes, C.M. Finck, A tissue-engineered model
of fetal distal lung tissue, Am. J. Physiol. Lung Cell Mol. Physiol. 293 (2007)
L639eL650.
[78] M.J. Mondrinos, P.L. Jones, C.M. Finck, P.I. Lelkes, Engineering de novo as-
sembly of fetal pulmonary organoids, Tissue Eng. Part A 20 (2014)
2892e2907.
[79] M. Ghaedi, E.A. Calle, J.J. Mendez, A.L. Gard, J. Balestrini, A. Booth, et al., Human
iPS cell-derived alveolar epithelium repopulates lung extracellular matrix,
J. Clin. Investig. 123 (2013) 4950 e4962.
[80] S.X. Huang, M.N. Islam, J. O'Neill, Z. Hu, Y.G. Yang, Y.W. Chen, et al., Ef ﬁcient
generation of lung and airway epithelial cells from human pluripotent stem
cells, Nat. Biotechnol. 32 (2014) 84 e91.
[81] T. Mammoto, A. Mammoto, Implantation of ﬁbrin gel on mouse lung to study
lung-speciﬁc angiogenesis, J. Vis. Exp. 94 (2014) e52012 .
[82] X. Ren, P.T. Moser, S.E. Gilpin, T. Okamoto, T. Wu, L.F. Tapias, et al., Engineering
pulmonary vasculature in decellularized rat and human lungs, Nat. Bio-
technol. 33 (2015) 1097 e1102.
[83] B.M. Baker, C.S. Chen, Deconstructing the third dimension: how 3D culture
microenvironments alter cellular cues, J. Cell Sci. 125 (2012) 3015 e3024.
Q. Tan et al. / Biomaterials 1 13 (2017) 1 18 e132132