<<<PAGE 1>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
Design, infectability, and transcriptomic analysis of transregionally
differentiated and scalable lung organoids derived from adult bronchial cells.
Authors: Alicia Reyes Valenzuela1,9*, Mark Turner2, Nathan Markarian3-5, Christophe Lachance-
Brais6, John Hanrahan7, Hojatollah Vali8, Silvia Vidal3,4 and Luc Mongeau1,9*.
1. Biological and Biomedical Engineering, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. H3A
2B4.
2. Pharmaceutical Drugs Directorate, Bureau of Gastroenterology, Infection and Viral Diseases,
Health Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, K1A 0K9.
3. Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, Canada, H3A 0C7
4. Research Centre on Complex Traits, McGill University, Montreal, Canada, H3G 0B1
5. Swine and Poultry Infectious Diseases Research Center and Research Group on Infectious
Diseases in Production Animals, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Montreal.
Montreal, Canada, J25 2MD
6.Chemistry Department, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. H3A 0B8
7. Department of Physiology, McGill University, Montreal, Canada. H3G 1Y6
8. Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
H3A 0C7.
9. Department of Mechanical engineering. McGill University. Montreal, Canada. H3A 0C3
*Corresponding author
*Alicia Reyes Valenzuela, email: alicia.reyes@mail.mcgill.ca, Telephone: 514-641-3637
*Luc Mongeau, email: luc.mongeau@mcgill.ca, Telephone: 514-398-2777
Mark Turner, email: mark.turner@hc-sc.gc.ca
1
<<<PAGE 2>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
Nathan Markarian, email: nathan.markarian@mail.mcgill.ca
Christophe Lachance-Brais, email: christophe-lachance-brais.@mail.mcgill.ca
Silvia Vidal, email: silvia.vidal@mcgill.ca
Hojatollah Vali, email: hojatollah.vali@mcgill.ca
John Hanrahan, email: john.hanrahan@mcgill.ca
Luc Mongeau, email: luc.mongeau@mcgill.ca
Abstract
The lung is a primary target for many lethal respiratory viruses, leading to significant global
mortality. Current organoid models fail to completely mimic the cellular diversity and intricate
tubular and branching structures of the human lung. Lung organoids derived from adult primary
cells have so far only included cells from the input cell region, proximal or distal. Existing models
are expensive. They often require cells from invasive deep lung tissue biopsies. The present study
aimed to address these limitations. The lung organoids obtained using an original protocol
exhibited transregional differentiation and were derived from relatively more accessible primary
cells from the trachea/bronchi. Immortal bronchial cell lines were also used to simplify organoid
fabrication and improve its scalability. The lung organoids are formed starting from bronchial cells
with fibroblasts feeder cells in an alginate hydrogel coated with base membrane zone proteins.
Characterizations were performed using bulk RNA sequencing and tandem mass tags. The
resulting organoids express markers of different lung regions and mimic to some extent the tubular
and branching morphology of the lung. The proteomic profile of organoid from primary cells and
from cell lines was found to evolve towards that of mature lung tissue. Upregulated genes were
mostly related to the respiratory system, tube development, and various aspects of respiratory viral
2
<<<PAGE 3>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
infections. Infection with SARS-CoV-2 and influenza H1N1 was successful and did not require
organoid disassembly. The organoids matured within 21 days and did not require complex or
expensive culture methods. Transregionally differentiated lung organoid may find applications for
the study of emerging or re-emerging viral infections and fostering the development of novel in-
vitro therapeutic strategies.
INTRODUCTION
The human lung is the primary target for many lethal respiratory viruses. Influenza viruses and
coronaviruses, for example, can cause acute respiratory distress syndrome1–3. Lower respiratory
infections constitute the fourth leading cause of death worldwide4. Viral infections depend on host-
specific mechanisms. Given their rapid adaptation to the host environment, the circulating viruses
can be genetically distinct from those grown under standard laboratory conditions such as 2D
monocultures3. These genetic alterations typically occur in virus envelope proteins that are crucial
for viral entry and transmission3. This is the case for the human parainfluenza virus3, but it could
potentially be true for other viruses as well.
It is generally acknowledged that the use of animal models for viral infections may be misleading
due to inter-species biological and individual differences, as well as interference with other
microorganisms5. Conventional 2D monocultures are also problematic, as they do not mimic tissue
organization in vivo, nor cell integrity due to 2D culture adaptation5.
Organoids, in contrast, can better recapitulate the cellular organization and physiology of original
organs, including cell communication6. Physiological mimicry is particularly useful, if not
essential, for the study of viral-host interactions, which involve more than one cell type in the
targeted tissue. For example, severe acute respiratory syndrome-2, SARS-CoV-2, first infects cells
3
<<<PAGE 4>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
from the proximal lung such as airway epithelial cells, ciliated and goblet cells. If not cleared, the
virus later infects cells from the distal lung region such as alveolar type II (AT2) cells as its primary
target7. Influenza A, as another example, infects airway epithelium cells lining the lung, including
AT2, thereby destroying key gas-exchange mediators and allowing viral exposure to endothelial
cells8. Gut, brain, vascular, kidney, and lung organoids have been used to model SARS-CoV-2 and
other infectious diseases1. Organoids have yielded improved predictive results for drug testing
before clinical trials. Their use is increasingly being adopted by pharmaceutical companies9.
Because of their prospective value as viral infection models, there has been a need for
physiologically multi-regional lung organoids. So far, organoids specifically designed to model
the lung have remained limited in their intrinsic complexity4. Most existing organoids target one
specific region of the lung, either proximal or distal. Examples include alveospheres10,
broncheospheres11, tracheospheres12,13 or human airways organoids14. As shown in Table S1,
existing organoids have been generated by primary cells derived from deep lung human or mice
tissue embedded in Matrigel. Recent progress has been made towards more intricate lung organoid
models. Zhou, and colleagues developed protocols for the generation of independent proximal and
distal lung organoids. But these regional models are independent, hampering the study of viral
infection with viral tropism as in the human body15. Das and colleagues created a lung organoid
expressing markers of both proximal and distal regions by modifying the cell culture medium with
additional growth factors and antioxidants16.
The scalability of lung organoids production remains problematic. Except of organoids derived by
induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC), lung organoid models require deep lung tissue biopsies for
the harvesting of primary cells needed for their fabrication1,10–18. Cancer and other diseased cells,
are often used in lieu of healthy cells, given the lack of availability of healthy donors, and the
4
<<<PAGE 5>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
invasive nature, and costs of lung tissue biopsy19,20. Clever and colleagues established culture
conditions for the long-term expansion of airway organoids for up to one year. But these lung
organoids only include cell populations from proximal regions such as basal, secretory and ciliated
cells; they do not express distal lung markers21. One common characteristic of the lung organoids
derived from primary adult cells is their spheroidal morphology (S. Table 1). Spheroids do not
reproduce the complex branching structures associated with the lung1,10–18. More complex lung
organoids derived from induced pluripotent stem cells have recapitulated multiple lung regions, as
well as a more arborized morphology17,18,22,23, as shown in S. Table 1. But, these organoids require
around 85-150 days to grow, along with costly and complex culture conditions17. Such growth rate
is insufficient to track epidemic progression and viral evolution in a crisis. In addition, they display
immature phenotypes, and thus cannot be infected with adult viral diseases, such as influenza type
A and SARS-CoV-222. Some lung organoids derived from primary adult cells have shown
infectibility with SARS-CoV-2 and influenza; but the need for segmentation and culture in cellular
monolayers14,16,19 negates the potential benefit of using organoids to understand disease
progression.
Organoid research has, so far, been confronted with the use of physiologically accurate models,
which are complex and multi-regional but cannot be infected due to their immature
phenotype17,18,22,23, or mature models that are infectible but only represent one specific region of
the lung with limited complexity14,16,19.
The objective of the present study was to create lung organoids featuring transregional
differentiation, defined as the differentiation of the input cells into phenotypes from both the
proximal and distal regions of the lung (Fig. 1A). Additionally, the study aimed to achieve several
desirable characteristics for the organoids: a complex tubular morphology indicative of self-
5
<<<PAGE 6>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
organization, low cost, scalability, and susceptibility to infection. Primary epithelial cells from the
trachea/bronchi, within the proximal lung region, were used as progenitors. The protocol led to
their differentiation into phenotypes from the distal regions of the lung, while maintaining some
phenotype characteristics from the proximal region. The same protocol was replicated using
immortal bronchial epithelial cells to further reduce model costs and enhance its availability. One
more aim was to infect these organoids with SARS-CoV-2 and influenza H1N1 without the need
of their segmentation to prevent viral 2D culture adaptions 24.
Fig. 1 Generation of lung organoids. A) Simplified schematic of the lung, as composed of two distinctive regions: proximal and
distal. Transregional lung organoids contain cells from both regions. B) Protocol for the development of lung organoids from the
co-culture of lung fibroblasts and airway epithelial cells from primary or immortalized origin. C) Representative phase contrast
pictures of lung organoids derived from immortal cell lines. Magnification 10X. Scale bar 200 um.
The following results describe lung organoids encompassing markers of cell types from both the
proximal and distal regions of the lung; these are referred as transregional differentiated lung
organoids (TDLO). These organoids could be formed from primary bronchial cells obtained from
6
<<<PAGE 7>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
patients (TDLO-p). A more scalable version of lung organoids (SLO-i) was achieved by using
immortalized cell lines. Both types of organoids display a tubular and branching morphology. The
maturation of TDLO-p and SLO-i was reached within a 21-day period. As a proof of concept,
SLO-i was successfully infected using SARS-CoV-2 and influenza H1N1. Viral replication was
quantified over time. These new models combine lung mimicry and facile preparation, to possibly
improve upon existing organoid models for viral drug testing.
RESULTS
Creation of human lung organoids derived from primary or immortalized bronchial
epithelial cells
To induce the formation of human lung organoids with a mimetic morphology, fibroblasts were
co-cultured with airway epithelial cells. The interaction between these cell types was to allow the
secretion of endogenous growth factors by the fibroblasts and guide organoid development. This
approach differs from the typical monoculture of airway epithelial cells with exogenous fibroblast
growth factors10,11,13–16,21. Epithelial progenitors, surrounded by mesenchyme, trigger the
development of native lungs25,26. To emulate this process, cells from a fibroblast finite cell line
(IMR-90), were encapsulated into a thin layer of hydrogels consisting of 2% Alginate and 5%
Gelatin (AlGe). This specific substrate composition was chosen for its initial stiffness of 2.025
kPa, which is representative of that of the lung and other soft tissues27. On day one, cells were
cultured with Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM). The following day, base membrane
zone proteins such as laminin, collagen IV, entactin, and heparin sulfate proteoglycans (Geltrex)
were incorporated into the superior portion of the hydrogel forming a secondary thin layer. Primary
human bronchial epithelial cells, HBE (isolated from human bronchus/trachea of both sexes,
7
<<<PAGE 8>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
namely one 53-year-old female and one 51-year-old male) were then seeded on the top of the
secondary layer.
Fig. 2. Characterization of lung organoids derived from primary bronchial epithelial cells (LOp) A). Markers used for the
identification of major or rare cell types in the lung in either proximal or distal regions. B). Representative phase contrast picture
of female derived lung organoid at day 18. Magnification 10x. Scale Bar 200 um. C-D). RNA sequencing data showing proximal
and distal markers of LOp, fibroblasts monolayers, and primary bronchial epithelial cells, respectively, in air-liquid-interface. N=3.
Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were defined using adj-pvalue < X and |log2FCshrink|≥4 X leading respectively to X, Y, Z
DEGs for A vs B, A vs C and B vs C. DEGs. * p.adjust <0.05 in comparison to IMR-90, *p.adjust <0.05 in comparison to HBE.
These primary cells were cultured with Bronchial Epithelial Cell Growth Medium (BEGM). The
input cell population contains basal cells, positive for p6314,15,28. It was been found that these basal
8
<<<PAGE 9>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
cells differentiate into multiple types of airway epithelial cells, including the ones populating the
distal lung regions29. This process can occur following lung injury, as reported in preclinical and
clinical studies29. Fibroblasts growth factors are known for their important roles in lung
development25,26, in particular the proliferation and stemness maintenance of stem cells 12,30,31. We
hypothesized that fibroblast cues would induce basal cell differentiation into distal regions of the
lung, including AT2 and AT1 cells. At day 3 of culture, cells were maintained in medium
combining of BEGM: DMEM in 1:1 ratio until day 21. The cell medium was changed every two
days. An overview of the protocol is shown in Fig. 1B.
The same approach was used with cell lines, parental human cystic fibrosis bronchial epithelial
cells were used, CFBE41-o. Although this cell line was originally derived from patients with cystic
fibrosis expressing F508 Del mutation32, these cells are devoid of any CFTR expression once
immortalized32,33. They are convenient, low-cost source of bronchial epithelial cells given their
commercial availability. It is well known that during the immortalization process of primary and
stem cells, there is a potential loss of their differentiation potential34. It has been suggested that the
culture of these cells into a proper microenvironment may help to overcome their loss of stemness
34–38. In a few studies, the culture of immortalized cell lines has led to their differentiation37,38. We
hypothesized that our protocol would trigger the differentiation of CFBE41-o into organoids with
proximal and distal lung phenotypes.
We monitored the development of lung organoids generated either with primary cells (LOp) or
immortalized cells (LOi) using low phase contrast microscopy. Figure 1.C shows representative
pictures of the derived LOi. Their morphology is not spheroidal but features tubular-like elongated
structures growing in thickness and diameter over time to reach an average size of 1.07 ± 0.06 cm
at day 21.
9
<<<PAGE 10>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
Cellular population and functional enrichment analysis for lung organoids derived from
primary cells
The objective was to identify the cellular differentiation of primary cells into the six major lung
epithelial cells from proximal and distal region14–16,21,39 of LOp, using bulk RNA sequencing.
Other markers for rare cell types were also evaluated26,39,40. Additionally, the morphology of these
organoids was monitored over time.
Nine organoids were processed and divided into three samples, each consisting of three organoids
(n=3 per sample). This grouping was chosen to ensure an adequate amount of RNA for analysis.
We compared the organoid’s gene expression with the one from the input cells: primary bronchial
epithelial cells, HBE, cultured in filters coated with collagen IV (see methods details), creating an
air-liquid interface, ALI, (n=3). This model is well-known to be the gold standard for proximal
airways41.
Similarly, the organoid gene expression was compared with the one from fibroblasts cultured in
traditional monolayers (n=3).
We used multiple markers for different cell types, as illustrated in Fig.2A. These markers have
been extensively used before for the identification of specific cell types10,14–17,21,23,39, since they
are the most abundant cells in the lung26. In addition, we used SOX2 as marker of multipotency
of proximal region of the lung22,26,42, while SOX9 was used as a marker of multipotency of distal
region of the lung22,26. For rare and recently discovered cells, we aimed to identify markers
associated with brush cells26, and pulmonary neuroendocrinal cells (PNES)26, located on the
proximal lung regions.
Lung organoids derived from primary cells show a tubular morphology with some ramifications
(Fig. 2B).
10
<<<PAGE 11>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
The expression from the markers used to identify basal cells, shown in Fig.2C, Cytokeratin 14,
Keratin 5, BNC1, p63, remains the same between HBE monolayers (grown in ALI) and TDLO-p.
As expected, monolayers of IMR-90 were devoid of any marker of basal cells, nor any other cell
types from the proximal lung region. It was found that the expression of markers associated with
secretory cells (SCGB1A1+), ciliated cells (FOXJ1+), and multipotency (SOX2+) decreased
within the organoid in comparison to HBE monolayers. Yet their expression was significantly
greater than that in IMR-90 cell monolayers. It was found that markers of goblet cells (MUC5AC,
MUC5B, and MUC2) were upregulated within HBE cells in comparison to LOp. Only mucin 15
was found to be upregulated in LOp. Most of the cell markers used to identify brush cells
(POU2F3, TRMP5, ALOX5AP), and PNECs (ASCL1) were found to be upregulated within the
organoid in comparison to HBE and IMR-90 (Fig. 2C).
Markers of cells from distal regions of the lung such as secretory (SCGB3A2+), Alveolar type II
(SFTPC+, SFTPD+) and Alveolar type I (HOPX+, PDPN+, AKAP5+) were all upregulated within
the organoid in comparison to HBE and IMR-90 cell monolayers as shown in Fig. 2C. SFTPB and
SFTPA were also present on HBE cell monolayers.
Overall, markers associated with proximal regions of the lung were down regulated in the
organoid, while markers associated with distal regions of the lung were upregulated. These
observations suggest that input bronchial cells, HBE, from proximal regions, differentiate into
multiple cell types from distal region while retaining some markers of the proximal region.
Because of this feature, these organoids were named Transregionally Differentiated Lung
Organoids (TDLO-p). The expression of representative genes of alveolar type II cells (SFTPC+)
is also supported by flow cytometry results. These results indicate that at least 10% ± 3% of the
cells conforming the organoid are positive for SFTPC (S. Fig.1).
11
<<<PAGE 12>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
Fig. 3. Functional Enrichment Analysis of lung organoids derived from primary cells (LOp), primary epithelial cells (HBE) and
lung fibroblasts (IMR-90) using g: Profiler. N=3. A-C) Heatmaps showing genes associated with respiratory system development
(A), tube development (B), and lung alveolus development (C) in all samples. Upregulation shown in blue. Differentially expressed
genes (DEGs) were defined using adj-pvalue < X and |log2FCshrink|≥4 X leading respectively to X, Y, Z DEGs for A vs B, A vs
C and B vs C. DEGs.
A quantitative comparison between gene expression in cell monolayers used to form the organoids
(HBE and IMR-90) and LOp (p adj.<0.05) revealed that 153 genes were up- or downregulated. A
functional enrichment analysis of those genes was performed using g: Profiler. Gene Ontology
(GO) analysis identified genes from several domains: Molecular function (MF), Biological Process
(BP), and cellular components (CC), as well as other biological databases as shown in S.Fig.2. Fig.
2 shows multiple BP terms identified from the functional enrichment analysis including respiratory
12
<<<PAGE 13>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
system development, tube development and lung alveolus development. Many genes from each
term were upregulated in the organoid in comparison to cell monolayers (Fig. 2A-C).
These results support the finding that the organoid constitutes a more transregionally differentiated
respiratory system model compared to HBE or fibroblasts alone. In addition, genes associated with
tube development (Fig. 2B) were upregulated within the organoid, which suggests that the tubular
morphology of the organoids may be the consequence of well orchestrated and complex processes.
This is also supported by other related terms, such as branching morphogenesis, tube
morphogenesis, and morphogenesis of branching structure. Once organoids are formed, genes
from each individual cell type, HBE or IMR-90 are upregulated. Additional genes are original and
not abundantly present in the input cells. This shows that the organoids evolve and self-organize
to yield a model that is more than the sum of the characteristics of the input of cells.
Cellular population of lung organoids derived from immortalized cell lines.
We aimed to evaluate the protocol for lung organoids using immortalized cell lines (LOi) instead
of primary epithelial cells. Parental human cystic fibrosis bronchial epithelial cells CFBE41-o.
were used. It was observed that the elimination of fibroblasts from the protocol led to a spheroidal
morphology (Fig. 4A). The addition of fibroblasts to the LOi led to a branching tubular
morphology (Fig. 4B). This supported our hypothesis that fibroblasts are critical for obtaining a
more sophisticated morphology.
The transcriptome of LOi was studied using RNA-sequencing using the same markers as for LOp
(Fig. 2A). Low levels of markers of basal cells (Cytokeratin 14, and p63) were found in the initial
cell monolayers (Fig. 4C), as expected given their stage of immortalization. After organoid
formation, p63 was upregulated in comparison to CFBE and IMR-90 (Fig. 4C). This indicated that
13
<<<PAGE 14>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
the protocol triggered changes in the genome even after cells are immortalized37,43, presumably
driving by microenvironment.
Markers of secretory cells (SGB1A1+) from the proximal region, goblet cells (MUC5B+,
MUC2+), brush cells (TRMP5+, IL25+), and PNECS cells (ASCL1+), were all undetectable or
minimal in cell monolayers, but they were all significatively upregulated in LOi (Fig.4C).
Similarly, secretory cells (SGC3A2+) from distal lung regions were upregulated in the organoids.
Alveolar type II markers, and AT1 markers were found not to be upregulated in the LOi in
comparison to cell monolayers. Nevertheless, the transcriptome profile of the LOi is more similar
to the one of adult tissue biopsies (male donors aged 42, 51, and 66 years) than to the transcriptome
of the input cell lines used to form the organoids (Fig. 4C-D). Altogether, gene expression data
indicates changes in LOi, regardless of the initial immortalization stage of the cells. But no cell
differentiation into distal phenotypes was observed. Therefore, TDLO could not be achieved using
immortal cell lines. The expression of various markers used was less abundant than that in
organoids derived from primary cells. Nevertheless, the expression was significantly greater than
that in cell monocultures.
Focused Ion Bean (FIB) microscopy was used to evaluate the morphology of LOi at day 21. Figure
4E shows LOi with a magnification of 1076 X. Arrows indicate the main organoid structure,
including morphological heterogenicity. Blue arrows point at multiple layers of epithelial cells,
while black arrows shows a pseudostratified squamous epithelium, characteristic of the airways of
the respiratory system44. Cell debris was observed near the center of the organoid. These
observations underscore the complexity and heterogeneity of cellular self-organization within the
organoid and shed light on its structural diversity. With a magnification of 5000 X (Fig.4F),
microvilli structures were identified, as shown in Fig.4F. Microvilli are microscopic membrane
14
<<<PAGE 15>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
cellular protrusions which are involved in the process of absorption of nutrients and cellular
secretion45. The emergence of microvilli suggests a level of cellular differentiation and
specialization within the organoids, despite their origin from cell lines that are traditionally
considered homogeneous41,46. This finding challenges the notion of cellular homogeneity, within
the organoids and underscores their dynamic nature, potentially reflecting a degree of cellular
plasticity and functional diversity. We anticipate observing similar structural heterogeneity for
TDLO-p. Notably, the identification of microvilli, which is typically associated with brush cells
in the lung47, further highlights the organoids' ability to mimic essential characteristics of native
lung tissue. Evidence of autophagy was discerned in LOi (Fig. 4F). Autophagy is the process of
degrading cytoplasmic components within lysosomes48. This process serves various physiological
functions, including adaptation to starvation, clearance of intracellular proteins and organelles,
development, anti-aging, elimination of microorganisms, cell death, tumor suppression, and
antigen presentation48. Interestingly, autophagy has been associated with the regulation of lamellar
body formation49. Lamellar bodies are concentric structures loaded with surfactant proteins
specific to AT2 cells49. While the reason for the abundance of autophagy in the organoids is not
known, one possibility could be its involvement in the development of these organelles.
15
<<<PAGE 16>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
Fig. 4 Characterization of lung organoids derived from immortal bronchial epithelial cells (LOi). A) Images showing the
morphology of organoids without fibroblasts in their culture at day 7. B) Images showing typical tubular morphology of lung
organoids at day 7. Red-F-actin. Blue-Nuclei. Magnification 10X. Scale Bar 200 µm. C-D) N=3. Differentially expressed genes
(DEGs) were defined using adj-pvalue < X and |log2FCshrink|≥4 X leading respectively X, Y, Z DEGs for A vs B, A vs C and B
vs C. DEGs. * p.adjust <0.05 in comparison to IMR-90, *p.adjust <0.05 in comparison to CFBE. E-F) Organoids (LOi) at day 21
were visualized using Focused Ion Bean microscopy (FIB). E) Structure of LOi. Pseudostratified squamous epithelium (black
arrow) and stratified squamous epithelium (blue arrow) were identified within the organoid. Magnification 1076X, scale bar 50
µm. F) Microvilli structures (black arrows) and signs of autophagy were found in LOi. Magnification 5000X. scale bar 5 µm.
16
<<<PAGE 17>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
Proteomic profiling of organoids and cell lines.
Additional indications of cellular dynamics were obtained using Tandem Mass Tags (TMT).
Three samples (n=3) of each type were used for this analysis. A principal component analysis of
the entire dataset (including lung tissues), depicted in Fig. 5A, indicated that both types of
organoids, LOp and LOi are reproducible, as evidenced by the tight clustering of their respective
samples (Fig.5A). A detailed numerical analysis of proteins found in the input cell monolayers
HBE, IMR-90, and LOp, is shown in Figure 5B. Among these samples, 1,361 proteins were shared.
Specifically, 1,542 proteins were identified in LOp, of which 180 were exclusive to the organoid
and absent from the cell monolayers. Similarly, a numerical comparison of proteins expressed in
CFBE, IMR-90, and LOi is shown in Figure 5C. A total of 1,357 proteins were common to these
three groups. In the LOi, 1,542 proteins were identified, with 180 proteins exclusively found in
the organoids. A closer look of the upregulated proteins in LOp and LOi is shown in Fig. 5D and
Fig.5E, respectively, as well as in S.Fig.3-4, and S. Table 2-3. Surfactant protein A stands out
among the upregulated proteins of the LOi. This protein plays an important role in the host-defense
mechanisms of the lung, including opsonizing virus, bacteria, and apoptotic cells; it also modulates
the production of cytokines and mediators of the inflammatory response50. In organoids derived
from primary cells, Prolactin Induced Protein (PIP) stands out. According to the human protein
atlas, this protein is characteristic of respiratory ciliated cells. All the upregulated proteins in the
organoids were analyzed using STRING software: https://string-db.org/ to collect supporting
information from multiple sources such as text mining of scientific literature, databases of
interaction experiments, and complex pathways51. All proteins were associated with lung tissue. It
was also observed that these proteins formed interconnected networks. This facilitates coordinated
communication and regulation of essential cellular functions, as shown in S.Fig.5. Protein
17
<<<PAGE 18>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
networks enhance signal amplification, pathway regulation, and adaptation to changing cellular
conditions compared to proteins working in isolation52.
Gene ontology was used to confirm the function and the associated tissues of the upregulated
proteins in LOi and LOp. Fig. 5F presents a summary of overrepresented terms (set of genes
associated with specific functions) categorizing proteins based on their biological roles or
properties in LOp and LOi. The figure illustrates the number of proteins corresponding to each
term and their statistical significance. Many proteins from both organoid types were associated
with lung tissue, soft tissue, respiratory epithelial cells, lung alveolar cells, lung macrophages, and
bronchus. For instance, proteins expressed in alveolar cells such as, H3C1, CST6, NDRG2, RPA1,
UQCRB, and CXB3 were upregulated in LOp, consistent with the transcriptome findings (Fig.2
and Fig.3), and their distal differentiation.
In organoids derived from immortal cell lines, LOi, proteins associated with viral life cycle, oral
mucosa, lung endothelial cells, and response to stress were found (Fig. 5F). In both organoid types,
proteins associated with tissue development were found. For instance, terms such as multicellular
organismal process, anatomical structure development, biogenesis, and cell migration were all
upregulated in the organoids. The data analysis shows that the proteins upregulated in the
organoids are not randomly selected; rather, they play key roles in essential functionalities crucial
for lung development and function. Together, these findings highlight the targeted and purposeful
nature of the protein expression profile observed in the organoids.
Some similarities were found between two types of organoids. The differences between the two
types of organoids are shown in Fig. 5G. The proteins upregulated in LOp relative to LOi are
shown in red. The proteins upregulated in LOi relative to LOp are shown in blue. Gene ontology
and STRING were used to find the functions of the differentiate expressed proteins between the
18
<<<PAGE 19>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
two organoids. The data analysis indicates that LOp has greater specificity to the lung and
respiratory system. The proteins upregulated in LOi, in comparison to LOp, were associated with
housekeeping gene functions at the DNA level such as DNA repair, DNA metabolic process, and
DNA conformational change.
According to their proteomic profile, organoids derived from both cell lines and primary cells
exhibit significantly more pertinent proteins than the input cell monolayers from which they are
derived. Both organoid types present a higher degree of specificity towards the lung and respiratory
system, and they logically display an upregulation of proteins that have diverse and relevant
biological functions.
19
<<<PAGE 20>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
Fig. 5 Proteomic profile of lung organoids and cell lines. A) Principal component analysis of cell monolayers, organoids, and
tissues. Orange-primary bronchial epithelial cells. Blue-immortalized epithelial cells. Green-Fibroblasts. Purple-Lung organoids
derived from primary cells (LOp). Red-Lung organoids derived from immortal cell lines (LOi). Grey-Lung Tissue from superior
region. Pink-Lung Tissue from inferior region. B) UpSet plot comparing the number of proteins in LOp (red), IMR-90, and HBE.
C) UpSet plot comparing the number of proteins in LOi (blue), IMR-90, and CFBE. D-E) Heatmap showing representative proteins
upregulated in LOp, and LOi, respectively, in comparison to cell monolayers from which they are derived from. Grouped by
abundances, linked by average. N=3. Upregulation shown in red. Downregulation shown in blue. G) Volcano Plot generated by
20
<<<PAGE 21>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
VolcaNoseR comparing LOp and LOi. Red upregulated proteins in LOp, Grey-unchanged proteins between samples. Blue-
downregulated proteins in LOp
Proteomic profile of lung organoids vs adult lung tissues
A proteomic analysis of lung organoids (LOp and LOi) and adult lung tissues from three male
donors aged 42, 51, and 66. Tissue samples from both superior and inferior regions were included
to capture any regional variations in protein expression. The clustering of protein data, as shown
in Fig. 6A, resulted in six distinct clusters. These clusters were determined based on the abundance
and expression patterns of proteins, employing ward D2 clustering method on Canberra distances.
Each cluster represents a group of proteins with similar expression profiles across the samples,
suggesting potential functional similarities or shared regulatory mechanisms. Cluster 1 highlights
the proteomic similarity between LOp and adult lung tissues. Interestingly, LOp shows
resemblance to both lung regions: superior and inferior. Recall, the primary cells are harvested
from proximal tissues. The harvest of cells from proximal regions of the tissues (throat and
bronchi) can reproduce in part the proteome of further distal tissue, harder and riskier to collect19,20.
This constitutes a potential benefit for future developments of lung organoids.
Cluster 2, the smallest, illustrates the similarities between the proteome of LOi and adult lung
tissues. Cluster 3 is characterized by an upregulation of proteins in adult lung tissues compared to
both types of organoids. Conversely, cluster 4 shows a pronounced upregulation of proteins in LOi
when compared to LOp and adult lung tissues. Cluster 5 demonstrates an upregulation of proteins
in LOp relative to LOi and adult lung tissues. Finally, cluster 6 indicates an overall upregulation
of proteins in both organoid types compared to adult lung tissues.
Gene ontology (GO) analysis was conducted on clusters 1, 3, and 6 of the proteome of adult lung
tissues and organoids. Figure 6B shows an overview of the terms that are overrepresented in these
21
<<<PAGE 22>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
clusters, according to their biological roles or properties. The data shows the number of proteins
associated with each term and its statistical significance. The overrepresented terms in cluster 1
show that the proteins shared between LOp and adult tissues are related to alveolar type II cells,
inflammatory response, lung macrophages, basal layer, epithelial migration, microvilli, and
response to stress. These results highlight the transregional differentiation of organoids (TDLO-p)
into the distal lung region phenotype (AT2 cells). Some phenotypes of the proximal lung region,
such as basal cells, are retained. The proteins upregulated in lung tissues with respect to organoids
(cluster 3) include overrepresented terms related to goblet cells, indicating a greater number of
these cells in the tissue. The functionalities of the proteins upregulated in the tissue include lung
epithelial cells, lung cell differentiation, tissue development and secretory cells. On the other hand,
the functionalities of the proteins upregulated in the organoids with respect to adult lung tissues
(cluster 6) were related to bronchus respiratory epithelium, oral mucosa, and nasopharynx
epithelium. This suggests that some of the proteins found more abundantly in the organoids
correspond to the proximal lung region. Additionally, several proteins related to viral infectibility
were found in the organoids, such as coronavirus disease, virus replication, viral transmission, and
response to virus, highlighting the potential application of the model for the study of viral diseases.
Numerical analysis was conducted to compare the number of proteins shared between tissues and
each type of organoid (Fig.6C-D). As shown in Fig. 6C, adult lung tissue and LOp shared 1518
proteins, from which 5 were exclusive to the tissues, and 6 to the organoids. For the LOi, adult
lung tissues and LOi shared 1519 proteins, with only 4 proteins absent in the organoids. LOi
organoids had a total of 6 proteins absent from the tissues.
Despite some discrepancies, the proteome of organoids exhibits a notable degree of similarity to
that adult lung tissues. Organoids derived from primary cells display proteins from multiple lung
22
<<<PAGE 23>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
regions, underscoring their transregional differentiation potential. Organoids derived from
immortal cell lines, show fewer similarities with adult lung tissue. But these LOi offer significant
advantages over simple cell lines due to their high specificity to the lung and respiratory system.
The LOi bridge the gap between sophisticated organoids and simpler cell lines, providing an
alternative to primary cells, which are costlier and more challenging to acquire and culture.
Therefore, this offers a more scalable model, named SLO.
23
<<<PAGE 24>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
Fig. 6 Proteomic profile of lung organoids and adult lung tissues. A) Heatmap of lung organoids derived from immortal cell lines
(LOi) and primary cells (LOp) as well as lung tissues from superior and inferior region. Grouped by abundance, linked by average.
N=3. Red indicates upregulation of proteins. Blue indicates downregulation. B) Gene Ontology analysis of the overrepresented
terms from upregulated proteins in LOp and lung tissues (cluster 1), adult lung tissues (cluster 3) and lung organoids (cluster 6).
C-D) UpSet plots visualizing the proteins shared between adult lung tissues and LOp (C) or LOi (D).
24
<<<PAGE 25>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
SARS-CoV-2 infection of lung organoids derived from immortalized cell lines (LOi)
One major focus of organoid research is their potential use as presumably accurate model system
for infections. The previous sections indicated on the benefits of organoids over cell monolayers,
and in terms of protein specificity showed their similarities to adult lung tissues. The organoids
generated in this study upregulated proteins associated with viral infections, coronavirus diseases
and viral replication (Fig. 6B). Therefore, we aimed to demonstrate possible applications for viral
infections, such as SARS-CoV-2, and influenza H1N1. Using RNA sequencing data, genes
associated the modulation of critical illness in patients with COVID-19 (SLC6A2, IFNAR1,
IFNAR2, OAS3, OAS1, FOXP4, DPP9, TYK2)53 were studied in organoids, and adult lung
tissues. The genes were expressed in all samples, but interestingly their upregulation was greater
in LOi than in LOp, as shown in Fig. 6A. The most abundant gene found in LOi was OAS3. This
is an antiviral enzyme which plays a role in cellular innate antiviral response. When activated, it
inhibits protein synthesis, thus terminating viral replication54.
Interferon induced transmembrane genes were also studied. These genes restrict cellular entry of
diverse viral pathogens such as influenza A, COVID-19, and Ebola virus55. Interferon Induced
Transmembrane 3 (IFITM3) was the most abundant transmembrane in all the samples, as shown
in Fig.6B. It was also significantly increased in the LOi.
25
<<<PAGE 26>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
Fig. 7. Exploring SARS-CoV-2 infection on lung organoids. A-C) RNA sequence data showing heatmap of genes associated with
A) critical illness of COVID-19, B) Interferon induced transmembrane. C) Entry receptors, priming and cleavage proteins for
SARS-CoV-2. T-tests (LOp and LOi) * p. adjust<0.05. N=3. Upregulation shown in blue. D) Images of LOi organoids at day 7
expressing in green TMPRSS-2 and ACE-2, blue-nuclei. Magnification 10X. Scale Bar 100 μm. E) Gene expression by qPCR of
TMPRSS-2 and ACE2 in organoid-green and CFBE monolayers-pink. n=3, p<0.05. F) Schematic representation of viral infection
in the organoids. G) Viral copies /ml (log10) on supernatant of organoids under MOI: 0.01 and 0.001 SARS-CoV-2 infected-purple,
and non-infected-black, 24 hpi and 48 hpi (n=3). H) Viral copies/ml (log10) on cell lysate of organoids MOI: 0.01 and 0.001 SARS-
26
<<<PAGE 27>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
CoV-2 infected-purple, and non-infected-black, 24 hpi and 48 hpi (n=3). Two-way ANOVA p<0.05 in every condition. LOD:
Limit of detection.
Entry and priming mechanisms of respiratory viruses such as Angiotensin-Converting-Enzyme 2
(ACE2) and Transmembrane serine protease 2 (TMPRSS2) were also studied. The former is the
main mechanism of entry of SARS-CoV-256, while the latter is involved in the priming of SARS-
CoV-256, other coronaviruses and influenza57. TMPRSS2 was more abundant in LOp than in the
tissues and LOi. ACE2 was highly upregulated in tissues, to a lesser degree in LOp, and less
abundant in LOi. Furin was also investigated since this protease has the potential to cleave the
viral envelope glycoprotein, enhancing viral fusion with host membrane58,59. It has been shown in
several studies to play an important role in SARS-CoV-2 infectivity59,60. Furin was most
upregulated in LOi, followed by LOp.
Given that a high number of genes associated with permissibility of respiratory infections were
upregulated in the organoids, we hypothesize that these organoids could be used to model SARS-
CoV-2 infection. The LOi also upregulated genes associated with the modulation of critical illness
of COVID-19 (Fig. 6A), and thus constitute potentially a better model. The presence of the proteins
TMPRSS-2 and ACE2 was confirmed in the LOi by immunofluorescence (Fig. 6D-green), and
their expression corroborated by qPCR (Fig. 6E). Therefore, we infected three LOi using SARS-
CoV-2 with a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.01 and 0.001 for 3 hours as shown in Fig. 6I.
The culture medium was then removed in both the upper and lower transwell chambers. Viral
aliquot in serum free medium was added in the upper chamber where the organoids were kept for
3 hours at 37°C. They were rocked every 15 minutes. After inoculation, the media was switched
to DMEM 2% FBS. At 24 and 48 hours post infection (hpi), the LOi and the cell culture medium
27
<<<PAGE 28>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
were harvested for the detection of viral infection. Our methodology allows the infection of native
organoids without their destruction, as for previous studies24-26.
No SARS-CoV-2 transcripts were found in the supernatant of negative controls. But SARS-CoV-
2 RNA was detected in the supernatants of infected organoids, indicating successful infection.
Furthermore, there was significant association between the MOI and the number of viral copies
detected, Fig. 6G, indicating that the extent of infection in organoids is sensitive to initial viral
load. In addition, organoid lysates were used to evaluate viral replication within the organoid 24
hpi and 48 hpi (Fig.6H). Viral copies were detected only on infected organoids, correlating with
the viral copies found in the supernatant. Similarly, organoids show infectibility with influenza
H1N1 (S.Fig.6)
28
<<<PAGE 29>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
DISCUSSION
Transregional differentiation
In the present study a novel approach to induce the formation of human lung organoids was
invented. The organoids derived from primary cells use cells from trachea/bronchi. These cells are
more accessible than deeper lung tissues, the usual source of cells for lung organoids24-26.
Regardless of their origin, these cells self-assemble into lung organoids, involving upregulation of
genes known to be associated with respiratory system development, tube development, and lung
alveolus development25,26. The expression of multiple cell markers from different regions of the
lung shows the transregional differentiation of the model relative to that of organoids representing
either proximal or distal lung regions. Overall, the expression of proximal markers of the TDLO-
p decreases, apart from basal cells, as the expression of distal markers increases, including
surfactant proteins produced by AT2 cells.
The proteome of these organoids demonstrates a similarity to that of adult lung tissues.
Furthermore, it supports the transcriptome data by showing the upregulation of several pathways
involved in cell differentiation, alveolar development, and respiratory epithelial cells, compared
to the input cell lines HBE and IMR-90.
Scalable lung organoids
The same protocol was successfully adapted to be used with immortal cell lines of bronchial
epithelial cells to improve the accessibility of cells and the scalability of the model. These types
of cells are cheaper, easier to grow and maintain than their primary counterpart. These organoids,
SLO-i, also express several genes and proteins specific to adult lung tissue. Once the organoids
are formed cellular markers from proximal regions are upregulated. This highlights the possibility
to use the culture microenvironment to recover the cell differentiation capacity of homogenous
29
<<<PAGE 30>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
immortal cells. The microenvironment used was simple, requiring only the 3D culture of
fibroblasts within a hydrogel that mimics natural stiffness, along with ECM proteins. Neither an
ALI culture, tidal breathing, nor vascularization were used. Enhancing the culture
microenvironment in the future could lead to higher cell differentiation into distal lung regions.
The differentiation of LOi into markers associated with distal lung regions such as HOPX for AT1
were not significatively upregulated, which suggest less heterogeneity and less cell transregional
differentiation of the model in comparison to TDLO-p.
The proteome of SLO-i included large pool of proteins specific to the respiratory system, including
lung, and trachea, as well as immune system proteins, which may be beneficial to model viral
infections. The data establishes the superiority of organoids over cell monolayers in terms of
specificity, while requiring simple culture methods during organoid formation.
Tubular morphology of lung organoids
The new lung organoid models, TDLO-p and SLO-i, exhibit a more sophisticated branching
morphology compared to spheroidal lung organoids. Typically, lung organoids derived from
iPSCs have a tubular morphology17,22. This study is the first to achieve such morphology using
adult stem cells, in the case of TDLO-p, and immortalized cells, in the case of SLO-i. Typically,
there are at least two levels of branching observed in the organoids, with some variations
depending on the donor. For instance, organoids derived from primary cells obtained from female
donors tend to exhibit more branching structures compared to those from male donors. This
achieved morphology is a simplified version of the lower airways, since this one form a branching
tree of 23 generations61.
Based on enrichment functional analysis, the morphology of the organoids derived form primary
cells (TDLO-p) appears to be the result of well orchestrated processes, as evidenced by the
upregulation of genes associated with tube development, and branching structures. We think that
30
<<<PAGE 31>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
this morphology is the result of using lung fibroblasts as feeder cells, since their removal from the
protocol yields a spheroidal morphology in SLO-i.
This constitutes an important step in the self-organization of cells into a functional organ.
Microscopic examinations of SLO-i, reveal mimetic self-organization traits, such as
pseudostratified squamous epithelium62, and microvilli structures47, but also cell debris deposited
randomly within void structures.
Genetic markers and proteins associated with viral infectability in organoids
Scalable lung organoids show upregulation of proteins associated with viral life cycle in respect
to the input cell lines, CFBE and IMR-90, used to form the SLO-i. These viral life cycle proteins
include those involved in viral entry, latency, transcription, and replication of the virus, as well as
proteins associated with host virus interactions63. This was confirmed by the upregulation of ACE2
and TMPRSS2 in the organoids, compared to the expression on CFBE grown in ALI. Both ACE2
and TMPRSS2 are essential for SARS-CoV-2 infection56.
Both organoids, TDLO-p and SLO-i show upregulation of proteins associated with viral
infectability in respect to adult lung tissues. These proteins include specific terms associated with
COVID-19 disease, viral replication, viral process, viral life cycle, viral translation, viral genome
replication, response to virus, and positive regulation by host-viral process (Fig. 6B). These data
align with the results obtained from transcriptomics, which showed upregulation of specific genes
involved in pathways necessary for COVID-19 and influenza infection (Fig. 7A-C).
These findings suggest that TDLO-p and SLO-i are relevant models to study respiratory viral
infections. This will not only allow for a greater understanding of infectious respiratory disease
etiology, but also pave the way for using these organoids as a tool to discover new and effective
anti-viral therapies.
31
<<<PAGE 32>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
Viral infection in scalable lung organoids
Given the low cost and availability of organoids derived from immortal cells, SLO-i was infected
with SARS-CoV-2 and influenza H1N1. The model responded to the infection, as indicated by the
detection of viral RNA copies in its supernatant and cell lysate. Unlike other models, the organoids
did not need to be destroyed to become infected14,16,21. This is a remarkable aspect as it allows the
study of viral infections in a 3D environment, preventing possible viral mutations3.
Ongoing studies are directed at the infection of TDLO-p with influenza H1N1 and SARS-CoV-2,
alongside the functional analysis of SLO-i using pre-approved drugs. Functional enrichment
analysis after infection is being conducted to compare the expression of genes with data from
clinical databases of patients with SARS-CoV-2.
Current research efforts also include comparing the phenotypes of TDLO-p and SLO-i with other
previously reported adult lung organoids representing either proximal or distal lung15 region or a
more heterogeneous lung model recently reported16.
LIMITATIONS OF THE STUDY
The new lung organoids have a tubular morphology with some branching structures. They appear
to be more similar to adult lungs than spheroidal lung models. They remain a much-simplified
representation of the complex morphology of adult lungs61. Markers of proximal and distal regions
of the lung remark the transregional differentiation of LOp, and its proteomic profile shows its
similarity that of adult lung tissues. But the spatial relationship of proximal and distal markers is
so far randomly distributed, which may be a consequence of the size of the organoid in comparison
to the actual organ. Future work is needed to gain insights into the structure of the organoid using
more qualitative methods than the ones here provided. Single-cell sequencing can provide in-depth
32
<<<PAGE 33>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
characterization to assess cellular composition and track their changes upon modification of the
protocol.
The proteome of the organoids included several proteins associated with the response to
mechanical stresses. Therefore, the model would benefit from the integration of mechanical forces
which occur during breathing. Proteins from the innate immune system were upregulated during
the organoid formation, which may support the physiological relevance of the model for viral
infections. But the incorporation of innate immune cells, such as macrophages would be beneficial
to better understand the pathophysiology of respiratory infections, and cell-cell communication.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Dr. Guangyu Bao for his guidance and training in rheology. Genome Quebec performed
RNA sequencing. We thank Virginie Calderon and the Montreal Clinical Research Institute
(IRCM) for the bioinformatics analysis of RNA sequencing data. We thank the Proteomics and
molecular Analysis Platform at Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre (RI-
MUHC) for performing tandem mass tags and for the statistical analysis. Specifically, we thank
Jennifer Nedow, Lorne Taylor and Jenna Cleyle. We thank Charlotte Fouquet for her help
extracting RNA from some samples infected with SARS-COV-2. This work was supported by
NIH fund RO1 DC018577 (Mongeau, PI). The views expressed in the present publication are the
authors’ own and do not necessarily represent those of the NIH. We thank CONACYT for
supporting the doctoral studies of Alicia Reyes Valenzuela.
CONTRIBUTIONS
Alicia Reyes Valenzuela conceived and designed the project, performed the experiments,
developed and optimized the protocol for organoid formation, fabricated and prepared the
organoids, and analyzed the data (unless stated otherwise). Mark Turner along with Prof. John
33
<<<PAGE 34>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
Harahan designed primers, contributed to qPCR analysis, and contributed their expertise in the
culture of epithelial primary cells. Prof. John Hanrahan provided the ethical protocol for the use
of human cell lines. Christophe Lachance-Brais edited and reviewed the manuscript. Prof.
Hojatollah Vali obtained images using Focused Ion Beam microscopy. Nathan Markarian
performed the organoid infection with SARS-CoV-2, performed RNA extraction of infected
organoids, and analyzed viral RNA copies in the organoid lysate and supernatant. Prof. Silvia
Vidal designed the experiments for viral infection and provided guidance for the viral study. Prof.
Luc Mongeau supervised the study, reviewed the manuscript, and provided guidance and
oversight.
COMPETING INTEREST
Alicia Reyes Valenzuela, Mark Turner, Silvia Vidal and Luc Mongeau have patent pending
(PCT/CA2024/050597) related to the lung organoid described here. While this patent demonstrates
our expertise and involvement in the field, we trust that it does not pose any conflicts of interest
regarding the objectivity and integrity of the research presented in this paper.
STAR METHODS
KEY RESOURCES TABLES:
Reagent or Resource Source Identifier
Antibodies
Goat anti Rabbit IgG (H+L) Highly Cross-Adsorbed Fisher Scientific A11034
Alexa Fluor 488 (secondary antibody)
Alexa Fluor Plus 647 Phalloidin Fisher Scientific A22287
Cytokeratin-14 Santa Cruz SC-53253
MUC5AC Santa Cruz SC-21701
MUC5B Santa Cruz SC-21768
SFTPB Santa Cruz SC-133143
34
<<<PAGE 35>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
SFTPC Santa Cruz SC-518029
ACE2 ThermoFisher MA5-32307
TMPRSS-2 Abcam ab109131
Hoechst dye Thermo Fisher H3569
Biological samples
Human Fetal Lung Fibroblasts, IMR-90 Cederlane CCL-186
Human Bronchial CF Epithelial cells, CFBE Cystic Fibrosis Translational Research NA
Centre (CFTRc) McGill
Human Lung Microvasculator Endothelial cells VWR CA10064-208
Human Primary Bronchial Tracheal Epithelial cells Cystic Fibrosis Translational Research BD649
(male) Centre (CFTRc) McGill
human Vocal Fold Fibroblasts University of Wisconsin hVFF
Influenza H1N1 Covar NA
Human Primary Bronchial Tracheal Epithelial cells Cystic Fibrosis Translational Research BD999
(female) Centre (CFTRc) McGill
Human Tissue Superior Bronchi (male 51 years Cystic Fibrosis Translational Research BD649
old) Centre (CFTRc) McGill
Human Tissue Inferior Bronchi (male 51 years Cystic Fibrosis Translational Research BD649
old) Centre (CFTRc) McGill
Human Tissue Superior Bronchi (male 42 years Cystic Fibrosis Translational Research BD342
old) Centre (CFTRc) McGill
Human Tissue Inferior Bronchi (male 42 years Cystic Fibrosis Translational Research BD342
old) Centre (CFTRc) McGill
Human Tissue Superior Bronchi (male 66 years Cystic Fibrosis Translational Research BD888
old) Centre (CFTRc) McGill
Human Tissue Inferior Bronchi (male 66 years Cystic Fibrosis Translational Research BD888
old) Centre (CFTRc) McGill
Human Tissue Superior Bronchi (male 56 years Cystic Fibrosis Translational Research BD743
old) Centre (CFTRc) McGill
Human Tissue Inferior Bronchi (male 56 years Cystic Fibrosis Translational Research BD743
old) Centre (CFTRc) McGill
Human Tissue Superior Bronchi (male 62 years Cystic Fibrosis Translational Research BD458
old) Centre (CFTRc) McGill
Human Tissue Inferior Bronchi (male 62 years Cystic Fibrosis Translational Research BD458
old) Centre (CFTRc) McGill
Human Tissue Superior Bronchi (male 59 years Cystic Fibrosis Translational Research BD843
old) Centre (CFTRc) McGill
Human Tissue Inferior Bronchi (male 59 years Cystic Fibrosis Translational Research BD843
old) Centre (CFTRc) McGill
Chemicals
Geltrex ThermoFisher A1413202
35
<<<PAGE 36>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
L-Glutamine ThermoFisher A2916801
Fetal Bovine Serum Sigma Aldrich F1051
Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM) Corning 15-017-CV
MEM Non-essential aminoacids Fisher Scientific LS11140
Penicillin-Streptomycin Fisher Scientific SV30010
Minimun Essential Medium (EMEM) Corning 10-010-CMR
PBS Fisher Scientific 10-010-049
Goat Serum 10% ThermoFisher 50062Z
RIPA buffer Sigma Aldrich R0278
Trizol ThermoFisher 15596026
Qubit Protein Assay ThermoFisher Q33211
Compensation beads ThermoFisher 01-2222-42
eBioscience Flow cytometry Staining Buffer ThermoFisher 00-4222-57
Bovine Serum Albumin Sigma Aldrich A9647
Alginate Sigma Aldrich A0682
Gelatin-type A Sigma Aldrich G2500
CaCl2 ACP C-0360
5X RT Master Mix Diamed ABMG486
RNA Spin Mini kit Ge Healthcare GE25-0500-71
Trypsin Fisher Scientific MT25053CI
5X RT Master Mix Diamed ABMG486
SYBR Green ThermoFisher A46109
Live/dead assay ThermoFisher L3224
NHS ThermoFisher 24510
2-Mercaptoethanol Sigma Aldrich 35600
EDC Sigma Aldrich 3450
Hydroxylamine-HCl ThermoFisher 26103
Primers Forward Reverse Company
HPRT 5'-GCGATGTCAATAGGACTCCAG-3' 5'-TTGTTGTAGGATATGCCCTTGA- IDT
3'
36
<<<PAGE 37>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
TMPRSS-2 5'CTTTGAACTCAGGGTCACCA-3' 5-'TAGTACTGAGCCGGATGCAC-3' IDT
ACE2 5'-CATTGGAGCAAGTGTTGGATCTT-3' 5'-GAGCTAATGCATGCCATTCTCA- IDT
3'
SARS-CoV-2- 5'- 5'-TGGCAGCTGTGTAGGTCAAC-3' IDT
Nucleocapsid (N) TAATACGACTCACTATAGGGAAATTTTGGGGACCAGGAAC -
3'
METHODS DETAILS
Cell culture and CFBE in air-liquid interface
CFBE and IMR-90 were cultured in Eagle’s minimum essential medium (VWR, CA45000-380)
supplemented with 10% (vol/vol) FBS (Sigma-Aldrich, F1051), 2 mM L-glutamine (Thermo
Fisher, A2916801), 1% Penicillin Streptomycin (Fisher Scientific, SV30010), and incubated at
37°C in 5% CO -95% O . Human Vocal Fold Fibroblasts (hVFF) were cultured in Dulbecco’s
2 2
Modified Eagle’s Medium (Life Technologies, 12430054) supplemented with 10% (vol/vol) FBS
(Sigma-Aldrich, F1051), 1% Aminoacids solution (Thermo Fisher, 11130051), 1% Penicillin
Streptomycin (Fisher Scientific, SV30010), and incubated at 37°C in 5% CO -95% O . For
2 2
establishment of ALI, CFBE were seeded on fibronectin (Promo cell, C-43060) coated permeable
cell culture inserts (Fisher Scientific, 08-771-10) and cultured for 21 days before the study.
Primary airway epithelium culture in air-liquid interface
Primary human bronchial epithelial were provided by Primary Airway Cell Biobank (PACB) in
the Cystic Fibrosis Translational Research Centre at McGill University. Cell from male and female
donors of 51 and 53 years old, respectively were used. Cells were seeded on collagen IV coated
cell culture inserts (Fisher Scientific, 08-771-10) and cultured in ALI medium provided by PACB.
After 3 days, the apical medium is removed, and cells were allowed to differentiate for 28 days at
the air-liquid interface before study. The medium in the basolateral chamber is changed every two
37
<<<PAGE 38>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
days. Once a week, the apical mucus is aspirated carefully to avoid disruption of the monolayer.
Followed by washing the apical side with PBS without Ca2+.
Establishing adult CFBE-derived human lung organoids
Human fetal lung, IMR90, cells were cultured overnight in different alginate-gelatin hydrogels in
a density of 250,000 cells per/cm2 using DMEM (Corning, 15-017-CV) with Penicillin-
Streptomycin (Fisher Scientific, SV30010) non-essential aminoacids (Fisher Scientific,
LS11140050) and FBS (Sigma-Aldrich, F1051) at 37°C. The media was removed, and the
hydrogels were coated using 100 μl/cm2 of Geltrex (Thermo Fisher, A1413202) during 30 minutes
at 37°C. Afterwards Human Bronchial CF Epithelial cell line was seeded on the top in a density
of 500,000 cells per/cm2 using EMEM (Corning) with L-Glutamine (Thermo Fisher, A2916801)
forming a co-culture interface. The next day the medium was substituted by a combination in a
ration 1:1 of DMEM and EMEM supplemented with 3 mM CaCl (Sigma, Aldrich, C4901). The
2
organoids were formed by cellular and extracellular matrix interactions. After 5 days of culture,
the maturation, and branching of the organoids was observed, and the organoids were cultured in
submerged until day 21 at 37°C under a humidified atmosphere with 5% CO and 95% air. During
2
culturing, medium was refreshed at most every two days.
Immunofluorescence Staining
Morphology
The morphological analysis of the organoids was made at day 7, 16, 21, 30 and 40 days, according
to the study. Organoids were washed with PBS (Fisher Scientific, 10-010-049) supplemented with
10 mM CaCl (Sigma, Aldrich, C4901) three times for 3 minutes. Afterwards, the organoids were
2
fixed with 3.7% paraformaldehyde, permeabilized with 0.3% Triton X-100 (Sigma Aldrich,
T9284), and blocked for 2 hours with 10% Goat serum (Thermo Fisher, 50062Z) at room
38
<<<PAGE 39>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
temperature. Organoids were culture with primary antibodies diluted in 10% goat serum at 4°C
overnight followed by incubation of secondary antibody Goat-anti Rabbit IgG Alexa Fluor 488
(Fisher Scientific, A11034), for 2 hours at room temperature. Nuclei and actin filaments were
counterstained with Hoechst dye (Thermo Fisher H3569) and Phalloidin-647 (Fisher Scientific,
A22287) respectively. The confocal images were acquired using an LSM-710 inverted confocal
microscope.
Protein expression
To evaluate the expression of proteins related to infection and replication of SARS-COV-2, such
as Transmembrane Protease Serine 2, TMPRSS, and Angiotensin Converting Enzyme 2, ACE2,
primary antibodies were used and incubated overnight in 10% goat serum followed by incubation
of secondary antibody Goat-anti Rabbit IgG Alexa Fluor 488 (Fisher Scientific, A11034) for 2
hours at room temperature. The primary antibodies used were the ACE2 recombinant rabbit
monoclonal antibody (SN0754) from ThermoFisher, and Recombinant Anti-TMPRSS-2 antibody
(AB109131) from Abcam.
Focused Ion Beam microscopy
Organoids derived from immortalized cells at 21 days of culture were embedded in resin after
sequential fixation in 2.5% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M cacodylate buffer (pH 7.2) at 4 °C. The
sections were examined under 2.5 nm at 30 kV Focused Ion Beam Microscope.
RNA isolation and quantitative PCR
RNA was extracted using Illustra RNA Spin Mini kit (Ge Healthcare, GE25-0500-71) according
to the manufacturer’s instructions. RNA (500 ng) was reverse transcribed with 5X RT Master Mix
(Diamed, ABMG486) with incubation at 25°C for 10 minutes, 42°C for 1 h, and 85°C for 5
minutes. Quantitative PCR (qPCR) was performed using Power track SYBR green (ThermoFisher,
39
<<<PAGE 40>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
A46109). The reaction was performed using a QuantStudio 7 Flex Real-Time PCR system and the
following protocol: 20 s at 95°C and 40 cycles at 95°C (1 s) and 60°C (20 s). The change in gene
expression relative to housekeeping gene (∆∆Ct) was calculated using the manufacturer’s software
package. Primers were predesigned for IDT, except for the house keeping gene HPRT, ACE2, and
TMPRSS2. They are listed in key Resources Table II.
Bulk RNA sequencing and analysis
The extraction, library preparation and sequencing services were provided by the Génome Québec
Centre d’expertise et de services. RNA extraction was performed according to the sample type, as
follows.
Lung, RNeasy Plus Universal mini kit (QIAGEN) was used. Frozen tissue samples were weighed
and processed on ice to prevent thawing. For homogenisation: 900 μl of RNeasy Plus Universal
Mini Kit provided lysis buffer reagent (i.e. QIAzol) was added to the tissues and homogenized
using a QIAGEN TissueLyser II with 2,8 mm ceramic beads, for 2 cycles of 30 Hz x 2 minutes
plus 1 cycle of 30 Hz x 1 minute. Extraction was performed according to the manufacturer's
instructions. RNA was eluted in 35 μl buffer provided with the extraction kit. RNA quality was
determined by the RNA Integrity Number (RIN), measured by 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent
Technologies) using RNA 6000 Nano kit, following the manufacturer’s protocol.
Organoid, three organoids were disassociated an integrated as one sample to obtain enough RNA
per sample. This was done on three independent sets of organoids. Therefore 9 organoids were
processed and divided in 3 samples. RNeasy Plus Universal mini kit (QIAGEN) was used. For
homogenisation 900 μl Trizol reagent was added to the samples and homogenized using a
QIAGEN TissueLyser II with 2,8 mm ceramic beads, for 3 cycles of 30Hz x 2 minutes. Extraction
40
<<<PAGE 41>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
was performed according to the manufacturer's instructions. RNA was eluted in 35 μl buffer
provided with the extraction kit.
RNA quality was determined by the RNA Integrity Number (RIN), measured by 2100 Bioanalyzer
(Agilent Technologies) using RNA 6000 Nano kit, following the manufacturer’s protocol.
Cells, miRNeasy mini kit (QIAGEN) was used. Cell samples were homogenized in the TRIzol
lysis reagent by passing the lysate 10 times through a 20-gauge needle attached to a sterile 3 ml
plastic syringe.
Extraction was performed according to the manufacturer's instructions. RNA was eluted in 35 μl
buffer provided with the extraction kit. RNA quality was determined by the RNA Integrity Number
(RIN), measured by 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies) using RNA 6000 Nano kit,
following the manufacturer’s protocol.
Library preparation
Ribosomal RNA was depleted from 250 ng of total RNA using QIAseq FastSelect. cDNA
synthesis was achieved with the NEBNext RNA First Strand Synthesis and NEBNext Ultra
Directional RNA Second Strand Synthesis Modules (New England BioLabs). The remaining steps
of library preparation were done using and the NEBNext Ultra II DNA Library Prep Kit for
Illumina (New England BioLabs). Adapters and PCR primers were purchased from New England
BioLabs.
Library QC
Libraries were quantified using the KAPA Library Quanitification Kits - Complete kit (Universal)
(Kapa Biosystems). Average size fragment was determined using a LabChip GX II (PerkinElmer)
instrument.
41
<<<PAGE 42>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
Sequencing
The libraries were normalized and pooled and then denatured in 0.02N NaOH and neutralized
using HT1 buffer. The pool was loaded at 175 pM on a Illumina NovaSeq S4 lane using Xp
protocol as per the manufacturer’s recommendations. The run was performed for 2x100 cycles
(paired-end mode). A phiX library was used as a control and mixed with libraries at 1% level. Base
calling was performed with RTA v3. Program bcl2fastq2 v2.20 was then used to demultiplex
samples and generate fastq reads.
Analysis
The quality of the raw reads was assessed with FASTQC v0.11.8. After examining the quality of
the raw reads, no trimming was deemed necessary. The reads were aligned to the GRCh38 human
reference genome with STAR v2.7.6a, with an average of 90 % of reads uniquely mapped. The
raw counts were calculated with FeatureCounts v1.6.0 based on the human reference genome
(release 108). Differential expression was performed using DESeq2 R package. Differentially
expressed genes were define using adj-pvalue < X and |log2FCshrink|≥4 X leading respectively
X, Y, Z DEGs for A vs B, A vs C and B vs C. DEGs heatmap were drawn based on z-score of
normalized count. Bioinformatics analyses were performed at the Bioinformatics core facility from
Montreal Clinical Research Institute (IRCM).
Tandem Mass Tag
Sample preparation.
Cells monolayers and organoids were washed with cold PBS (X3) following by incubation on ice
cold RIPA buffer (Sigma, R0278). The cell monolayers and organoids were broken using a plastic
cell scraper. The organoids were stabbed using a 21G needle until completely disassociated. Cells
were collected and centrifuged at 16000 G for 50 minutes at 4°C. The supernatants were collected,
42
<<<PAGE 43>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
protein quantification was performed with Qubit Protein Assay (ThermoFisher, Q33211), and
normalized to 45 ng of protein. Samples were stored at -80 °C until analysis. All the reported
proteins have a 95% threshold.
Experimental procedure
Samples were treated with TMT-16plex reagents (ThermoFisher Scientific) according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. Labelled peptides were fractionated using Pierce™ High pH
Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit into 8 fractions.
Each fraction was re-solubilized in 0.1% aqueous formic acid and 2 micrograms of each was
loaded onto a Thermo Acclaim Pepmap (Thermo, 75uM ID X 2cm C18 3uM beads) precolumn
and then onto an Acclaim Pepmap Easyspray (Thermo, 75uM X 15cm with 2uM C18 beads)
analytical column separation using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 uHPLC at 250 nl/min with a gradient
of 2-35% organic (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over three hours running the default settings
for MS3-level SPS TMT quantitation (McAlister et al, 2014 - Anal Chem. 2014 Jul
15;86(14):7150-8. doi: 10.1021/ac502040v.), on an Orbitrap Fusion instrument (ThermoFisher
Scientific) was operated in DDA-MS3 mode.
Briefly, MS1 scans were collected at 120,000 resolutions, scanning from 375-1500 m/z, collecting
ions for 50 ms or until the AGC target of 4e5 was reached. Precursors with a charge state of 2-5
were included for MS2 analysis, which were isolated with an isolation window of 0.7 m/z. Ions
were collected for up to 50 ms or until an AGC target value of 1e4 was reached and fragmented
using CID at 35% energy; these were then read out on the linear ion trap in rapid mode.
Subsequently, the top 10 (height) sequential precursor notches were selected from MS2 spectra for
MSquantitative TMT reporter ion analysis, isolated with an m/z window of 2 m/z and fragmented
43
<<<PAGE 44>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
with HCD at 65% energy. Resulting fragments were read out in the Orbitrap at 60,000 resolutions,
with a maximum injection time of 105 ms or until the AGC target value of 1e5 was reached.
Mass Spectrometry Raw Data Analysis
To translate .raw files into protein identifications and TMT reporter ion intensities, Proteome
Discoverer 2.2 (ThermoFisher Scientific) was used with the built-in TMT Reporter ion
quantification workflows. Default settings were applied, with Trypsin as enzyme specificity.
Spectra were matched against the humn protein fasta database obtained from Uniprot (2022).
Dynamic modifications were set as Oxidation (M), and Acetylation on protein N-termini. Cysteine
carbamidomethyl was set as a static modification, together with the TMT tag on both peptide N-
termini and K residues. All results were filtered to a 1% FDR.
Analysis
The set of proteins for each group was analyzed using the STRING software database available
online (https://string-db.org/). STRING collects and scores evidence from several sources,
including text mining from the scientific literature, databases of interaction experiments and
complex pathways, computational interactions, and predictions from co-expression 30. Only nodes
and networks with high strength (p<0.05) and low false discovery rate are shown.
Protein abundances across different conditions were collected in a matrix, and unidentified
proteins were imputed with a value of zero. A pseudo-count of one was then added to the matrix,
and a z-score was calculated for each protein (row-wise). Heatmaps were created in R with the
ComplexHeatmap package, employing the ward. D2 clustering method on Canberra distances.
Clusters of proteins were extracted, and overrepresentation analyses were performed on Gene
Ontology (GO) terms, KEGG pathways, Human Protein Atlas (HPA) tissues, and CORUM
complexes with the R package gprofiler2 (PMID 31066453). The p-values were statistically
44
<<<PAGE 45>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
corrected with the false discovery rate (FDR) correction method. Statistically significant terms
with adjusted p-values < 0.05 were selected and presented in dotplots using the R package ggplot2.
Additionally, UpSet plots were created in R with the upsetR package to enumerate non-redundant
interactions identified among the different condition
Rheological measurements
The shear moduli of AlGe hydrogels were determined using a torsional rheometer with parallel
plates (Discovery HR-2). Isothermal time sweeps were applied at a frequency of 0.1 Hz and 0.1 %
strain at 37 °C. The shear moduli were recorded and analyzed using TA instruments software.
Experiments were conducted in triplicate.
Biomaterial synthesis
AlGe-A solution of 2% Alginic acid molecular weight (MW) 212.121 g/mol (Sigma, A0682) was
prepared in MilliQ water and sterilized with 0.2 μm PES filter (Fisher Scientific, FB12566502).
The solution was mixed with 5% sterile Gelatin type A (Sigma, G2500). The hydrogel was formed
by incubation with 100 mM CaCl MW 147.02 g/mol (ACP, C-0360)for 15 minutes.
2,
SARS-CoV-2 infection in human lung organoids
A clinical viral isolate (isolated prior to November 2020) termed SARS-CoV-2 CP13.32 passage
2 (Genbank accession no. 599736; lineage B1.1.147) stock was obtained from the McGill
University Health Center and it was propagated in VeroE6 cells five times. The latter stock (P5)
was used for infecting the organoid samples.
Before infection, the organoids were washed twice with plain DMEM. Organoids were then
inoculated with MOI of 0.001 and 0.01 of SARS-CoV-2 (CP13.32 strain, P5) in a serum-free
medium for 3 hours at 37°C and were rocked every 15 minutes. After inoculation, the media was
45
<<<PAGE 46>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
switched to DMEM 2% FBS. At the indicated times, the organoids and cell culture medium were
harvested for detection of viral load. The cell-free culture medium was analyzed as “supernatant.”
Quantification of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in Supernatant using RT–qPCR
At the indicated times of infections, viral RNA was extracted from 140 μL of supernatant using
the QIAamp Viral Mini Kit. The primers used are described in the supplementary section. SARS-
CoV-2 RNA was detected in a 10µL reaction containing 1 µL of extracted RNA sample, 200nM
of SARS-CoV-2-specific primers, 1X RT enzyme mix in the reaction mixture containing SYBR
Green (Power SYBR™ Green RNA-to-C ™ 1-Step Kit). The one-step RT–qPCR comprises a
T
30min RT step at 38 °C and 10 min of AmpliTaq Gold DNA polymerase activation at 95 °C,
followed by 40 cycles of PCR at 95 °C for 15 s and 60 °C for 1 min. The RNA copy number was
calculated from a standard curve 10-fold serially diluted RNA made from in vitro transcripts
consisting of SARS-CoV-2 with known copy numbers. The limit of detection (LOD) was 51
genomic copies per reaction.
Quantification of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in Cell Lysates using RT–qPCR
At the indicated times of infections, viral RNA was extracted from cell lysates (organoids
resuspended in 1mL of TRIzol) using the PureLink RNA Mini Kit (ThermoFisher). The primers
used are described in the supplementary section. SARS-CoV-2 RNA was detected in a 10µL
reaction containing 1 µL of extracted RNA sample, 200nM of SARS-CoV-2-specific primers, 1X
RT enzyme mix in the reaction mixture containing SYBR Green (Power SYBR™ Green RNA-to-
C ™ 1-Step Kit). The one-step RT–qPCR comprises a 30min RT step at 38 °C and 10 min of
T
AmpliTaq Gold DNA polymerase activation at 95 °C, followed by 40 cycles of PCR at 95 °C for
15 s and 60 °C for 1 min. The RNA copy number was calculated from a standard curve 10-fold
46
<<<PAGE 47>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
serially diluted RNA made from in vitro transcripts consisting of SARS-CoV-2 with known copy
numbers. The limit of detection (LOD) was 48.6 genomic copies per reaction.
Statistical analysis
For transcriptomic data, differential expression analysis was performed using the DESeq2 R
package. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were defined using an adjusted p-value < X and
|log2FCshrink| ≥ 4, resulting in X, Y, and Z DEGs for A vs B, A vs C, and B vs C, respectively.
For specific genes (e.g., six major cell types, critical illness of COVID-19), a t-test was performed
between groups, with significance considered at p.adj < 0.05.
For proteomic data, the p-values were statistically corrected with the false discovery rate (FDR)
correction method. Statistically significant terms with adjusted p-values < 0.05 were selected and
presented in dotplots using the R package ggplot2.
For the rest of the data, GraphPad was used for statistical analysis. According to the type of data,
either two-way ANOVA or t-test was performed. P<0.05 was consider statistically significant.
*p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.005
REFERENCES
1. Chen, D. et al. Human Organoids as a Promising Platform for Fighting COVID-19. Int. J.
Biol. Sci. 18, 901–910 (2022).
2. Du, J. et al. Stem cell therapy: a potential approach for treatment of influenza virus and
coronavirus-induced acute lung injury. Stem Cell Res. Ther. 11, 192 (2020).
3. Porotto, M. et al. Authentic Modeling of Human Respiratory Virus Infection in Human
Pluripotent Stem Cell-Derived Lung Organoids. mBio 10, e00723-19,
/mbio/10/3/mBio.00723-19.atom (2019).
4. World Health Organization. Tuberculosis. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-
sheets/detail/tuberculosis (20323).
47
<<<PAGE 48>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
5. Si, L. et al. Human Organ Chip-Enabled Pipeline to Rapidly Repurpose Therapeutics during
Viral Pandemics. http://biorxiv.org/lookup/doi/10.1101/2020.04.13.039917 (2020).
6. Kim, J., Koo, B.-K. & Knoblich, J. A. Human organoids: model systems for human biology
and medicine. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 21, 571–584 (2020).
7. Hou, Y. J. et al. SARS-CoV-2 Reverse Genetics Reveals a Variable Infection Gradient in the
Respiratory Tract. Cell 182, 429-446.e14 (2020).
8. Kalil, A. C. & Thomas, P. G. Influenza virus-related critical illness: pathophysiology and
epidemiology. Crit. Care 23, 258 (2019).
9. Ramezankhani, R., Solhi, R., Chai, Y. C., Vosough, M. & Verfaillie, C. Organoid and
microfluidics-based platforms for drug screening in COVID-19. Drug Discov. Today 27,
1062–1076 (2022).
10. Mulay, A. et al. SARS-CoV-2 infection of primary human lung epithelium for COVID-19
modeling and drug discovery. Cell Rep. 35, 109055 (2021).
11. Sprott, R. F. et al. Flagellin shifts 3D bronchospheres towards mucus hyperproduction.
Respir. Res. 21, 222 (2020).
12. Cunniff, B., Druso, J. E. & van der Velden, J. L. Lung organoids: advances in generation and
3D-visualization. Histochem. Cell Biol. 155, 301–308 (2021).
13. Rock, J. R. et al. Basal cells as stem cells of the mouse trachea and human airway
epithelium. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 106, 12771 (2009).
14. Zhou, J. et al. Differentiated human airway organoids to assess infectivity of emerging
influenza virus. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 115, 6822–6827 (2018).
15. Chiu, M. C. et al. A bipotential organoid model of respiratory epithelium recapitulates high
infectivity of SARS-CoV-2 Omicron variant. Cell Discov. 8, 57 (2022).
48
<<<PAGE 49>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
16. Tindle, C. et al. Adult stem cell-derived complete lung organoid models emulate lung
disease in COVID-19. eLife 10, e66417 (2021).
17. Miller, A. J. et al. Generation of lung organoids from human pluripotent stem cells in vitro.
Nat. Protoc. 14, 518–540 (2019).
18. Konishi, S. et al. Directed Induction of Functional Multi-ciliated Cells in Proximal Airway
Epithelial Spheroids from Human Pluripotent Stem Cells. Stem Cell Rep. 6, 18–25 (2016).
19. Chiu, Y.-W. et al. Costs of Biopsy and Complications in Patients with Lung Cancer. Clin.
Outcomes Res. Volume 13, 191–200 (2021).
20. Hutchinson, J. P., Fogarty, A. W., McKeever, T. M. & Hubbard, R. B. In-Hospital Mortality
after Surgical Lung Biopsy for Interstitial Lung Disease in the United States. 2000 to 2011.
Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 193, 1161–1167 (2016).
21. Sachs, N. et al. Long‐term expanding human airway organoids for disease modeling. EMBO
J. 38, e100300 (2019).
22. Chen, Y.-W. et al. A three-dimensional model of human lung development and disease from
pluripotent stem cells. Nat. Cell Biol. 19, 542–549 (2017).
23. Dye, B. R. et al. Human lung organoids develop into adult airway-like structures directed by
physico-chemical biomaterial properties. Biomaterials 234, 119757 (2020).
24. Sang, Y., Miller, L. C., Nelli, R. K. & Giménez-Lirola, L. G. Harness Organoid Models for
Virological Studies in Animals: A Cross-Species Perspective. Front. Microbiol. 12, 725074
(2021).
25. Warburton, D. et al. The molecular basis of lung morphogenesis. Mech. Dev. 92, 55–81
(2000).
49
<<<PAGE 50>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
26. Zepp, J. A. & Morrisey, E. E. Cellular crosstalk in the development and regeneration of the
respiratory system. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 20, 551–566 (2019).
27. Guimarães, C. F., Gasperini, L., Marques, A. P. & Reis, R. L. The stiffness of living tissues
and its implications for tissue engineering. Nat. Rev. Mater. 5, 351–370 (2020).
28. Li, Y. et al. p63: a crucial player in epithelial stemness regulation. Oncogene 42, 3371–3384
(2023).
29. Chu, X. et al. Evidence for lung repair and regeneration in humans: key stem cells and
therapeutic functions of fibroblast growth factors. Front. Med. 14, 262–272 (2020).
30. Chua, F. & Laurent, G. J. FIBROBLASTS. in Encyclopedia of Respiratory Medicine (eds.
Laurent, G. J. & Shapiro, S. D.) 213–219 (Academic Press, Oxford, 2006). doi:10.1016/B0-
12-370879-6/00156-3.
31. Gotoh Noriko. Control of Stemness by Fibroblast Growth Factor Signaling in Stem Cells and
Cancer Stem Cells. Current Stem Cell Research & Therapy (2009).
32. Benedetto, R. et al. Epithelial Chloride Transport by CFTR Requires TMEM16A. Sci. Rep.
7, 12397 (2017).
33. Bebok, Z. et al. Failure of cAMP agonists to activate rescued ΔF508 CFTR in CFBE41o -
airway epithelial monolayers: ΔF508 CFTR activity in CFBE41o − cells. J. Physiol. 569,
601–615 (2005).
34. Wang, Y., Chen, S., Yan, Z. & Pei, M. A prospect of cell immortalization combined with
matrix microenvironmental optimization strategy for tissue engineering and regeneration.
Cell Biosci. 9, 7 (2019).
50
<<<PAGE 51>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
35. Maddaly Ravi. Enhancing the Utility of Cancer Cell Lines by culturing them as 3D
Aggregates and 3D Reverts – My experiences thus far. (2018)
doi:10.13140/RG.2.2.33998.51521.
36. Obinata, M. The immortalized cell lines with differentiation potentials: Their establishment
and possible application. Cancer Sci. 98, 275–283 (2007).
37. Soleimani, M. & Ghasemi, N. Lithium Chloride can Induce Differentiation of Human
Immortalized RenVm Cells into Dopaminergic Neurons. 9, (2017).
38. Okamoto, T. et al. Clonal heterogeneity in differentiation potential of immortalized human
mesenchymal stem cells. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 295, 354–361 (2002).
39. Travaglini, K. J. et al. A molecular cell atlas of the human lung from single-cell RNA
sequencing. Nature 587, 619–625 (2020).
40. Basil, M. C. et al. Human distal airways contain a multipotent secretory cell that can
regenerate alveoli. Nature 604, 120–126 (2022).
41. Leach, T. et al. Development of a novel air–liquid interface airway tissue equivalent model
for in vitro respiratory modeling studies. Sci. Rep. 13, 10137 (2023).
42. Gontan, C. et al. Sox2 is important for two crucial processes in lung development: Branching
morphogenesis and epithelial cell differentiation. Dev. Biol. 317, 296–309 (2008).
43. Laurenzi MA, Arcuri C, Rossi R, Marconi P, Bocchini V. Effects of microenvironment on
morphology and function of the microglial cell line BV-2. Neurochem Res. (2001).
44. Rackley, C. R. & Stripp, B. R. Building and maintaining the epithelium of the lung. J. Clin.
Invest. 122, 2724–2730 (2012).
51
<<<PAGE 52>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
45. Lange, K. Fundamental role of microvilli in the main functions of differentiated cells:
Outline of an universal regulating and signaling system at the cell periphery. J. Cell. Physiol.
226, 896–927 (2011).
46. Agraval, H., Sharma, J. R., Dholia, N. & Yadav, U. C. S. Air–Liquid Interface Culture
Model to Study Lung Cancer-Associated Cellular and Molecular Changes. in Cancer
Biomarkers (ed. Deep, G.) vol. 2413 133–144 (Springer US, New York, NY, 2022).
47. Yusuf S. Khan. David T. Lynch. Histology, Lung. (StatPearls, 2023).
48. Mizushima, N. Autophagy: process and function. Genes Dev. 21, 2861–2873 (2007).
49. Li, X. et al. The Role of Autophagy in Lamellar Body Formation and Surfactant Production
in Type 2 Alveolar Epithelial Cells. Int. J. Biol. Sci. 18, 1107–1119 (2022).
50. Wright, J. R. Immunoregulatory functions of surfactant proteins. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 5, 58–
68 (2005).
51. Szklarczyk, D. et al. The STRING database in 2021: customizable protein–protein networks,
and functional characterization of user-uploaded gene/measurement sets. Nucleic Acids Res.
49, D605–D612 (2021).
52. Brodland, G. W. How computational models can help unlock biological systems. in
Seminars in cell & developmental biology vol. 47 62–73 (Elsevier, 2015).
53. The GenOMICC Investigators et al. Genetic mechanisms of critical illness in COVID-19.
Nature 591, 92–98 (2021).
54. Choi, U. Y., Kang, J.-S., Hwang, Y. S. & Kim, Y.-J. Oligoadenylate synthase-like (OASL)
proteins: dual functions and associations with diseases. Exp. Mol. Med. 47, e144–e144
(2015).
52
<<<PAGE 53>>>
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601655; this version posted July 9, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
55. Zani, A. et al. Interferon-induced transmembrane proteins inhibit cell fusion mediated by
trophoblast syncytins. J. Biol. Chem. 294, 19844–19851 (2019).
56. Hoffmann, M. et al. SARS-CoV-2 Cell Entry Depends on ACE2 and TMPRSS2 and Is
Blocked by a Clinically Proven Protease Inhibitor. Cell 181, 271-280.e8 (2020).
57. Shen, L. W., Mao, H. J., Wu, Y. L., Tanaka, Y. & Zhang, W. TMPRSS2: A potential target
for treatment of influenza virus and coronavirus infections. Biochimie 142, 1–10 (2017).
58. Essalmani, R. et al. Distinctive Roles of Furin and TMPRSS2 in SARS-CoV-2 Infectivity. J.
Virol. 96, e00128-22 (2022).
59. Johnson, B. A. et al. Furin Cleavage Site Is Key to SARS-CoV-2 Pathogenesis.
http://biorxiv.org/lookup/doi/10.1101/2020.08.26.268854 (2020)
doi:10.1101/2020.08.26.268854.
60. Xia, S. et al. The role of furin cleavage site in SARS-CoV-2 spike protein-mediated
membrane fusion in the presence or absence of trypsin. Signal Transduct. Target. Ther. 5, 92
(2020).
61. Davies A, Moores C. STRUCTURE OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM, RELATED TO
FUNCTION. The Respiratory System. in The respiratory system (2010).
62. Kia’i N, Bajaj T. Histology, Respiratory Epithelium. 2024. (In: StatPearls [Internet].
Treasure Island, 2024).
63. Hulo, C. et al. Bacterial Virus Ontology; Coordinating across Databases. Viruses 9, 126
(2017).
A) Cell monolayers and LOi
53
D) Cell monolayers and LOp